                                            T EMPORAL D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT IN R EAL -W ORLD
                                        P HARMACEUTICAL DATA : I MPLICATIONS FOR U NCERTAINTY
                                                  Q UANTIFICATION IN QSAR M ODELS


                                                 Hannah Rosa Friesacher1,2                  Emma Svensson2,4                 Susanne Winiwarter6




arXiv:2502.03982v1 [cs.LG] 6 Feb 2025
                                                      Lewis Mervin3                        Adam Arany2                       Ola Engkvist1,5

                                         1                                             2                          3
                                             Molecular AI, Discovery Sciences              ESAT-STADIUS,              Molecular AI, Discovery Sciences
                                                   AstraZeneca R&D                           KU Leuven,                     AstraZeneca R&D
                                              Gothenburg, 431 83 Sweden                     3000 Belgium                Cambridge, CB2 0AA UK

                                                          4                                                 5
                                                            ELLIS Unit Linz &                               Department of Computer
                                                     Institute for Machine Learning                         Science and Engineering
                                                     Johannes Kepler University Linz                    Chalmers University of Technology
                                                            Linz, 4040 Austria                             Gothenburg, 412 96 Sweden

                                                                   6
                                                                     Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Research and
                                                              Early Development Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism (CVRM),
                                                                                  BioPharmaceuticals R&D,
                                                                           AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, 431 83 Sweden




                                                                                           A BSTRACT
                                              The estimation of uncertainties associated with predictions from quantitative structure-activity re-
                                              lationship (QSAR) models can accelerate the drug discovery process by identifying promising
                                              experiments and allowing an efficient allocation of resources. Several computational tools exist that
                                              estimate the predictive uncertainty in machine learning models. However, deviations from the i.i.d.
                                              setting have been shown to impair the performance of these uncertainty quantification methods. We
                                              use a real-world pharmaceutical dataset to address the pressing need for a comprehensive, large-scale
                                              evaluation of uncertainty estimation methods in the context of realistic distribution shifts over time.
                                              We investigate the performance of several uncertainty estimation methods, including ensemble-based
                                              and Bayesian approaches. Furthermore, we use this real-world setting to systematically assess the
                                              distribution shifts in label and descriptor space and their impact on the capability of the uncertainty
                                              estimation methods. Our study reveals significant shifts over time in both label and descriptor space
                                              and a clear connection between the magnitude of the shift and the nature of the assay. Moreover, we
                                              show that pronounced distribution shifts impair the performance of popular uncertainty estimation
                                              methods used in QSAR models. This work highlights the challenges of identifying uncertainty
                                              quantification methods that remain reliable under distribution shifts introduced by real-world data.
    Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



1      Introduction

The development of new therapeutic agents is a time- and resource-consuming process, characterized by high failure
rates and development spans of over a decade until a compound can be put on the market [1, 2]. The use of artificial
intelligence (AI), or more precisely, machine learning (ML) approaches, can contribute to easing these problems by
using the extensive amount of data produced in the drug discovery pipeline to train computational models that can
effectively support future projects with their expert knowledge [3]. During early-stage drug discovery, a part of the vast
chemical space is screened to identify promising molecular compounds, which are subsequently optimized to achieve
the desired properties [4]. The large scale and complexity of this early-stage screening make it an ideal application
for ML models with their high computational power and predictive abilities [3, 5]. Quantitative structure-activity
relationship (QSAR) models are well-established in computer-aided drug discovery for identifying compounds with
desired features. They enable the prediction of biological activities or properties of chemical compounds based on
their molecular structure. However, the reliability of these approaches is crucial to optimally support an informed
decision-making process, which ultimately saves money and time in the lengthy and costly drug discovery pipeline.
Uncertainty quantification is a powerful tool to increase the reliability of ML models and the confidence in deploying
them to real-world applications [6]. Various sources can lead to uncertainty in the predictions obtained from neural
networks. A common classification found in literature is the distinction between aleatoric uncertainty, which originates
from uncertainty in the data, and epistemic sources, which quantifies uncertainty inherent in the choice of model [7, 8].
Optimally, estimates of the predictive uncertainty should represent the total uncertainty originating from these different
sources. Uncertainty quantification methods can be classified into Bayesian approaches [9, 10, 11, 12], ensemble-based
models [13, 14], conformal predictors [15, 16], evidential learning [17, 18, 19, 20, 21] and distance-based approaches
[22]. Furthermore, multiple techniques exist that can improve the uncertainty estimates post hoc by calibrating them
using a simple function trained on a separate calibration dataset [23, 24, 25]. Many of these computational tools have
been explored for drug discovery applications to enable the estimation of predictive uncertainties in molecular property
prediction tasks [26, 27]. However, available uncertainty quantification methods vary in their ability to capture all
sources of uncertainty correctly, and there is no clear agreement in previous studies on which approach estimates these
uncertainties most reliably [19, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36].
Furthermore, the available uncertainty quantification methods have primarily been evaluated on public data lacking
temporal information about the measurements, which is needed to perform data splits that cohere with the history of the
assay of interest. Due to this lack of temporal information, the use of temporal splitting techniques for cross-validation
is not possible, which is needed to realistically evaluate model performance over time, as reported by Sheridan [37] for
classification and Landrum et al. [38] for regression tasks. Alternative splitting strategies that do not require temporal
input include random splits or approaches that are based on the chemical structure of the chemical compounds. However,
these methods are usually too optimistic or pessimistic compared to the true prospective prediction as they do not reflect
the evolution of data in real-world pharmaceutical drug discovery projects [37].
The first part of this work investigates the evolution of real-world pharmaceutical data and the resulting distribution
shift. Dundar et al. [39] reported an intrinsic assumption of many training algorithms that the data is independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d). While this assumption is foundational for traditional ML models, it imposes significant
constraints and oversimplifies the complexities of realistic scenarios [40]. Consequently, the simplified problems may
fail to accurately represent or address the challenges inherent in real-world datasets, such as the pharmaceutical data
included in this study. In the context of probability calibration, deviations from the i.i.d. setting have been shown to
impair the performance of common uncertainty estimation methods previously reported to improve model calibration
under i.i.d. conditions [41, 42].
Therefore, the second part of this work compares common uncertainty estimation approaches that employ real-world
temporal splits to evaluate model performance in a more realistic setting. In binary classification problems, neural
networks typically give probability-like predictions that can be directly interpreted as an estimate of the confidence
in the prediction. Previous work has concluded that modern neural networks often fail to give realistic estimates of
the uncertainty associated with a prediction in classification tasks, resulting in poorly calibrated models [26, 27, 43].
Several approaches exist in the literature that use more sophisticated techniques to improve the reliability of these
uncertainty estimates. For a more straightforward comparison between the uncertainty estimation methods used in
this work, we classify them into two categories, namely train-time uncertainty estimation approaches and post hoc
probability calibration methods.
Train-time uncertainty quantification approaches refer to Bayesian methods or ensemble-based techniques inspired
by the Bayesian framework to estimate the posterior distribution of predictions from a set of models [14, 13, 44].
These approaches include uncertainty by accounting for model variance, which increases when the neural network is
overfitting, or the test instance lies outside the domain of the training data. We consider three methods for train-time


                                                               2
    Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



uncertainty estimation in this work. Deep ensembles and Monte Carlo (MC) dropout aim to improve the performance
by obtaining numerous base estimators to determine the model variance [7, 13, 14]. Furthermore, we compare the
ensemble-based strategies with a full Bayesian neural network trained with the Bayes-by-Backprop approach [10]. The
posterior distribution accounts for model variance in the Bayesian setting, where the network’s parameters are treated as
random variables rather than point estimates and which therefore provides a natural solution for including epistemic
uncertainty. Bayes-by-Backprop allows to quickly obtain samples from the posterior distribution of the neural network
weights by using a variational approximation scheme.
While these train-time uncertainty quantification approaches aim to achieve better uncertainty estimation by accounting
for the epistemic uncertainty, post hoc calibration approaches improve model calibration by applying an additional
post-processing step to the scores retrieved from a separately trained classifier. These methods require a separate
dataset, called a calibration set, to train the calibrating function used in the post-processing step. For this study, we
tested two post hoc calibration techniques, including the commonly used Platt scaling approach [23] and Venn-ABERS
predictors [24], which were previously shown to enhance the probability calibration of classifier predictions [35, 45].
Platt scaling fits a logistic regression to the classification scores of the calibration set to counteract over- or underfitted
uncertainty estimations, while Venn-ABERS predictors use the more flexible isotonic regression functions to calibrate
the probability point estimates.
To our knowledge, only a few studies have addressed the performance of uncertainty estimation approaches under
temporal shifts. In some of these works, temporal splitting approaches are applied to ChEMBL [46] data, using the
publication date as a reference [19]. As the date of publication does not correspond to the date when the experiment was
conducted, it remains questionable how accurately this information can reflect the timeline in a pharmaceutical company.
Other studies [47, 48] used internal data from pharmaceutical companies with the necessary information to perform
proper temporal splits. Rodríguez-Pérez et al. [47] studied the performance of multitask graph neural networks for
uncertainty estimation focusing on intrinsic clearance data. Another recent work compares the uncertainty estimation of
various regression models for pharmacokinetic property prediction of potential drug molecules [48]. However, both
of these studies use training data from a fixed time span for all experiments and, therefore, do not address model
performance over time. Furthermore, they do not address shifts in the data caused by the temporal splitting strategy.
Svensson et al. [49] recently published an extensive temporal study comparing uncertainty estimation methods trained
on drug-target interaction data with and without censored data. While this study provides a comprehensive guide on
handling uncertainty estimation methods for regression tasks, a comparable large-scale study that applies temporal
splitting strategies to different biological assays has yet to be published for classification approaches.
In this work, we aim to address these gaps by assessing the performance of different uncertainty estimation approaches
using single-task models over time and in the context of assay-specific distribution shifts in the data. The models were
trained on an internal dataset, which has already been studied in previous works [49, 50, 51]. This dataset includes
drug-target interaction data from different biochemical assays, providing the additional information required to perform
temporal splits. First, we analyze the history of the individual assays and how the data distribution shifts in label and
descriptor space over time. Next, we compare available probability calibration and train-time uncertainty quantification
methods and explore possible connections between their performance and data shifts.

2      Methods
The following section is structured into three parts to examine the material and methods used in this study. The first
section describes the assay data and the splitting strategy used to generate splits representing different time spans in
the assay history. The second part addresses the modeling approaches, including the base estimators and the more
sophisticated uncertainty estimation approaches. Finally, the last section provides insight into the experiments and
metrics used to compare the uncertainty estimation approaches comprehensively.

2.1     Data

This study uses internal data from 15 biological assays to gain insight into the properties of real-world pharmaceutical
data and subsequently train binary classifiers for each assay separately. Parts of the dataset [50, 51] or the whole
dataset [49] have already been used in previous studies. The included assays are diverse and represent different
optimization problems typically addressed during the drug discovery workflow to enhance the pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties of a drug candidate. Furthermore, the assays exhibited different sizes, modeled endpoints,
and ratios of the preferred class in the individual datasets. The total size of the assays is illustrated in the left panel of
Figure 1. In addition, Table 1 provides detailed information on the assays used in this study. The assays were assigned
to two categories, Target-Based (TB) and ADME-T, and subsequently labeled based on size and category affiliation.
The labels of the ADME-T assays were created from the class name and the assay description together with the


                                                               3
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




Figure 1: Overview of dataset sizes. The left panel plots the size of the individual assays ordered according to assay
size. The striped areas in the bar indicate the amount of compounds belonging to the preferred class (PC) in each assay.
The right panel shows the amount of training data in each temporal setting across all assays, with 1, 2, or 3 time spans
used for training.

Table 1: Overview of the assay data. Details of the assays included in this study, including assay size, assay unit,
and modeled endpoint. Descriptions of the ADME-T assays are shown. The ratio of compounds belonging to the
preferred class (PC) is reported for each assay. The last column indicates the corresponding threshold T used to assign
compounds to classes and if the PC lies above or below T (PC < / > T )

                                        Assay      Assay     Ratio       Assay       Modeled        Threshold T
         Abbreviation              Description      Size      PC         Unit        End-point     (PC < / > T )
        Target-Based
        TB-1                                NA      5,082       0.38      µM           pIC50            >6
        TB-2                                NA      5,237       0.39      µM           pIC50            >6
        TB-3                                NA     10,465       0.82      µM           pIC50            >6
        TB-4                                NA     10,624       0.73      µM           pIC50            >6
        TB-5                                NA     12,612       0.16      µM           pEC50            >6
        TB-6                                NA     13,093       0.79      µM           pIC50            >6
      . TB-7                                NA     14,605       0.33      µM           pIC50            >6
         ADME-T
         A-CYPa                     CYP3A4         12,875       0.79       µM          pIC50            <5
         A-CYPb                  CYP2C9 (I)        12,876       0.84       µM          pIC50            <5
         A-CYPc                 CYP2C9 (II)        14,062       0.30       µM          pIC50            <5
         A-PM                   Permeability       16,511       0.15    1e-6cm/s        logP            >1
         A-SOL                     Solubility      47,607       0.48       µM           logS            >2
         A-hERG                      Toxicity      67,687       0.70       µM          pIC50            <5
         A-logD                 Lipophilicity      88,114       0.58        -           logD            >3
         A-MS              Metabolic Stability     92,161       0.36   µl/min/1e6      logMS            <1


prefix “A“ to indicate theaffiliation to the ADME-T category (e.g., A-logD for the lipophilicity assay). The TB assays
were ordered according to size and numbered consecutively (TB-1 for the smallest to TB-7 for the largest assay).

TB Assays. The TB category includes project-specific assays from activity screens to identify active substances on a
specific target of interest. Active substances are compounds that modulate the function of a protein, for example, by
inhibiting or activating the target. This work includes seven TB assays, with assay sizes ranging from 5,082 to 14,605
measured compounds. As opposed to the ADME-T assays, further specifics regarding these biological assays cannot be
disclosed due the proprietary constraints.


                                                            4
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



ADME-T Assays. Assays in the ADME-T category typically assess the pharmacokinetic properties and toxicity
profile of a drug candidate. These properties are connected to the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion
(ADME) of a compound, while the toxicity screens identify compounds that hit unintended targets. The ADME-T
category comprises assays that assess the general features of a compound, which are typically relevant for the success
of a promising compound in the drug discovery and development pipeline [52, 53]. The assays, which include data
from various projects, are usually comparatively large. In our study, eight ADME-T assays were used, including five
large assays with measurement numbers between 16,511 and 92,161 and three smaller assays comprising 12,875 and
14,062 data points, which measure interactions with Cytochrome P450 (CYP).
As opposed to the TB assays, the ADME-T assays included in this study are widely used in the drug discovery process,
which allows the disclosure of more detailed descriptions of the assays. The CYP assays measure the inhibition of one
of the two CYP isoforms, CYP3A4 (A-CYPa) and CYP2C9 (A-CYPb and A-CYPc). These isoforms play an essential
role in drug metabolism and the detection of drug-drug interactions [54, 55, 56]. Two distinct assay types are available,
exploring different types of interactions with the CYP isoforms. The CYP2C9 (I) and CYP3A4 assays measure drug
molecule disappearance using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, while the CYP2C9 (II) assay measures CYP
inhibition using a fluorescent substrate. In both assays, weaker interactions with the CYP protein are usually favorable
to avoid rapid decomposition of the drug molecule and drug-drug interactions. The permeability assay (A-PM) evaluates
the flux of a compound across a Caco-2 cell, reflecting its potential in vivo absorption, which is measured in 1e-6 cm/s
[57]. High velocities are favorable, indicating a compound’s ability to cross biological membranes. The solubility assay
(A-SOL) assesses the maximum concentration of a compound in an aqueous solution at pH 7.4. A Dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) stock solution is used, and the organic solvent is evaporated to obtain a solid sample. Compounds with high
solubility are preferred to allow sufficient dissolution in biological fluids [58]. The hERG assay (A-hERG) provides
vital insight into a compound’s toxicity profile by measuring its inhibiting effects on the human Ether-a-go-go Related
Gene (hERG) potassium channel. Inhibition of hERG is correlated to severe cardiac side effects by prolonging the QT
interval [59]. Therefore, inhibiting interactions with hERG is usually undesirable. The lipophilicity of a compound is
obtained in the A-logD assay by measuring the logarithm of the distribution coefficient between octanol and aqueous
phase at pH 7.4. Lipophilicity is crucial since it significantly affects drug absorption, metabolism, and safety. A logD
greater than 3 has previously been identified as a trigger for safety concerns [60, 61]. Finally, the metabolic stability
assay (A-MS) measures how fast a compound is metabolized in rat hepatocytes. The in vivo hepatic clearance is
measured in µl/min/million cells. In general, low values for hepatic clearance are desirable, as they imply slower
decomposition and, therefore, higher bioavailability of the drug molecule [62, 63].



Binary Classification of Compounds. The measured values were converted to a logarithmic scale, and a suitable
threshold was determined for each assay individually. Assay-specific thresholds were defined to determine if a
compound belongs to the preferred class. All TB assays, obtain a compound’s inhibiting potency by measuring the
IC50, except TB-5, in which the EC50 was used. The IC50 value measures the compound concentration needed to
inhibit half of a protein’s activity, while the EC50 value indicates the compound’s concentration that triggers half of the
maximum possible effect. Subsequently, these values were converted to pIC50/pEC50 by taking the logarithm of the
measurements converted from micromolar (µM ) to molar. The preferred classes in the TB assays comprise compounds
with a pIC50/pEC50 value above 6, indicating that a substance achieves the desired effect when its IC50/EC50 value is
below 1 µM . In addition, four ADME-T assays, including the three CYP and the hERG assays, contain pIC50 values.
Since these assays aim to detect interaction with off-targets, lower pIC50 thresholds of 5 were selected to decrease the
risk of false negatives. The preferred class includes compounds with pIC50 values below this threshold. For A-logD,
A-SOL, A-PM, and A-MS, individual thresholds were chosen as shown in Table 1 to assign compounds with desirable
properties to the preferred class.



Temporal Split. For each assay, we split the data into five roughly equally sized folds using the date of each
measurement. Each fold represents a specific time span in the history of the assay. These folds were then used to set
up three experimental settings, using one, two, or three folds for training the QSAR models. In each case, the first
subsequent fold was used for validation, including model selection and calibration where applicable. We only evaluated
each setting on the first fold following the validation set for consistency between test sets. However, all remaining folds
could, in principle, be used. Figure 2 illustrates the temporal splitting strategy. Considering all assays and settings, 45
separate training datasets were used throughout this work. For experiments in which the results of all three settings are
used, the assays are labeled with the Assay Abbreviation [Temporal Setting]. Naturally, the size of the training sets
varies among the temporal settings as shown in the right panel of Figure 1.


                                                            5
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




 BIOACTIVITY DATA                          TEMPORAL SPLIT                                      MODEL TRAINING
          from                               5 Time Spans                                      3 Temporal Se�ngs
                           Assay Start                                  �me       1.                     1       2       3
7 Target-Based Assays
                                     1      2     3          4        5           2.             1       2       3       4
8 ADME-T Assays
                                     # Measurements in Folds ~ N
                                                                                  3.      1      2       3       4       5
                                                                                              Training         Valid.   Test
Figure 2: Overview of the temporal split and model training. The data in each assay was assigned to 5 time spans
to create three temporal settings, each with increasing amounts of training (Training) data. The subsequent two folds
were used for validation (Valid.) and testing (Test). The validation data also served as a calibration set used in post hoc
calibration approaches.
2.2   Models

Figure 3 provides an overview of the models compared in this study. All architectures used in this work stem from a
Random Forest (RF) or a multilayer perceptron (MLP). Both approaches are commonly used in research addressing
uncertainty estimation in QSAR modeling [35, 36, 30]. Furthermore, both approaches can be easily combined with
the ECFP fingerprint representation. Note that more sophisticated options exist for molecular representations and
model architectures, like graph neural networks for molecular graph representations or language models for SMILES
representations. However, since our study aims to gain insight into uncertainty estimation in QSAR models rather than
finding the best approach, or comparing molecular representations, we opted for the simple ECFP representation. The
RDKit package [64] was used to generate ECFP fingerprints of length 4096 from the SMILES [65] of the compound
structures. Due to additional computational constraints, we concentrated on RF and MLP models as suitable choices for
examining uncertainty quantification in a temporal context.

                 BASELINE MODELS                                           UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATION
      Random Forest        Mul�layer Perceptron              Deep Ensemble             MC Dropout            Bayesian NN
          (RF)                    (MLP)                         (MLPE)                  (MLPMC)                 (BNN)




Figure 3: Overview of the classification models. The architectures of the baseline models and train-time uncertainty
quantification methods compared in this study are shown. All models were trained in a single-task manner. The
hyperparameters of the baselines, RF and MLP, were tuned in an extensive grid search. The baseline MLP was used as
the basis for the three uncertainty quantification methods, deep ensembles, MC dropout, and a Bayesian neural network.


Model Generation. A Python package is publicly available at https://github.com/MolecularAI/uq4dd, which
contains the code used for model generation and evaluation inspired by the design pattern proposed by Hartog et al. [66].
The hyperparameter tuning for the two base estimators, RF and MLP, was performed using an exhaustive grid search.
The binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss was calculated to compare the model performance on a validation set. The exact
parameter space search is described in the appendix (Table 3). The RF models were generated using scikit-learn [67].
During hyperparameter tuning, the maximum depth of the trees and the required number of estimators of each assay and
temporal setting were individually tuned using the validation BCE loss. Probability-like outputs were generated from
the ratio of decision trees in the RF that classified a test instance as active. The MLP models were trained using PyTorch
[68] with the BCE loss function. Similarly, the model selection, including early stopping, was optimized using the
validation loss for every assay and temporal setting. The network architecture was optimized for the number of hidden
units, number of hidden layers, and dropout rate. Additionally, the learning rate and scaling factor of a ReduceOnPlateu


                                                            6
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



learning rate scheduler were also optimized. Adam was used as an optimization algorithm [69] to train the neural
networks. Probability-like scores were obtained by applying a sigmoid function to the output of the MLP.
The base estimators were further modulated to generate more sophisticated uncertainty estimation methods. Train-time
uncertainty quantification methods were trained using the MLP base estimators. Furthermore, post hoc probability
calibration methods were applied to selected models. A detailed description of the train-time and post hoc calibration
uncertainty estimation methods can be found below.

Train-time Uncertainty Quantification. Train-time uncertainty quantification approaches aim to estimate uncertainty
during model training by accounting for uncertainty in the neural network. They account for model variance, which
increases when the model is overfitting, or the test instance lies outside the domain of the training data. In contrast to post
hoc calibration methods, they do not apply a post-processing step to the scores of the classifier. In this work, we compare
two ensemble-based techniques inspired by the Bayesian theorem: deep ensembles (MLPE) and Monte Carlo (MC)
dropout (MLPMC). We also include one full Bayesian neural network trained with the Bayes-by-Backprop approach
(BNN). These methods aim to estimate the posterior distribution over the parameters of the neural network[13, 14, 44].
Theoretically, the posterior distribution P (Θ|D) over model parameters Θ, given data D, can be computed using the
Bayesian theorem

                                                               P (D|Θ)P (Θ)
                                            P (Θ|D) = R                       .                                            (1)
                                                              P (D|Θ)P (Θ) dΘ

When working with high-dimensional posteriors, the calculation of the closed-form solution of the Bayesian equation
is usually infeasible due to the intractability of the evidence term in the denominator, which requires solving a
highly complex integral. To circumvent this problem, sampling-based methods are often used that retrieve samples
Θ := {θ1 , θ2 , ..., θN } from the posterior distribution, so that θn ∼ P (Θ|D). During inference, the predictions of the
sampled models are averaged to obtain a mean estimate of the target label y given the descriptor x:

                                                                   N
                                                              1 X
                                               P (y|x, D) ≈         P (y|x, θn ).                                          (2)
                                                              N n=1

Both ensemble-based approaches, deep ensembles (MLPE) and MC dropout (MLPMC), approximate the Bayesian
treatment by estimating the predictive uncertainty using numerous base estimators. Deep ensembles use multiple
randomly initialized models as base estimators, corresponding to different local minima in the loss landscape [13]. In
this work, 25 base estimators were trained, and their predictions were averaged to obtain a point estimate. MC dropout
applies dropout during inference by setting a number of randomly selected neurons to zero to introduce stochasticity
[14]. To generate MC dropout (MLPMC) models, 400 forward passes using dropout were aggregated, with the average
being the final prediction of the models.
To compare the ensemble-based methods with a full Bayesian approach, we include Bayesian neural networks (BNN)
trained with the Bayes-by-Backprop method in the comparison study. We used a previously published repository
for the Bayes-by-Backprop method accessible at https://github.com/ThirstyScholar/bayes-by-backprop
as a template for our implementation of the BNN approach. In the Bayesian setting, neural network weights are
treated as random variables rather than point estimates, which allows model variance to be accounted for in the
posterior distribution of the weights. Since the parameter space is usually high-dimensional, the closed-form solution
of the posterior distribution cannot be solved. Bayes-by-Backprop provides a quick solution for obtaining samples
from the approximate posterior distribution of neural network weights W using a variational approximation scheme.
The underlying idea of Bayes-by-Backprop is to learn the optimal parameters Θ∗ of a surrogate distribution that
minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [70] between the simpler surrogate q(W |Θ) and the complex posterior
distribution P (W |D)

                                          Θ∗ = argmin KL[q(W |Θ)|P (W |D)].                                                (3)
                                                    Θ

The calculation of the resulting KL divergence requires the incomputable closed-form solution of the posterior.
Therefore, the evidence lower bound (ELBO) is used to derive a computable loss function that can be used in the
backpropagation framework:

                          L(Θ, D) = argmin KL[q(W |Θ)|P (W )] − Eq(W |Θ) (logP (D|Θ)).                                     (4)
                                           Θ


                                                               7
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



When sampling from the surrogate distribution, the introduced stochasticity prevents using a backpropagation scheme.
To allow the computation of gradients, the local reparametrization trick is applied. Instead of sampling directly from the
proposal function, a deterministic transformation function with learnable parameters is used to convert a sample of
parameter-free noise into a sample of the proposal function. We refer to Blundell et al. [10] for more technical details
of the Bayes-by-Backprop approach.

Post hoc Probability Calibration. Two post hoc probability calibration techniques were fitted to each model using
the validation set. These approaches included Platt scaling [23] and Venn-ABERS (VA) predictors [24]. Platt scaling
fits a logistic regression to the classification scores to counteract over- or underfitted uncertainty estimations [23]. Two
isotonic regression functions were trained on the validation set and a given test instance [24] for calibration with VA
predictors. The two isotonic regression functions represent the hypothesis that the test instance is active versus inactive.
As such, the probabilities obtained from the isotonic regression functions correspond to a lower and an upper bound on
the estimated probability. Finally, these bounds were condensed to a point estimate, as proposed by Toccaceli et al. [71].
The suffixes -P and -VA indicate models calibrated with Platt scaling or Venn-ABERS predictors, respectively. For
instance, the calibrated MLPE model was labeled MLPE-P or MLPE-VA.

2.3   Experiments

The first part of this study focuses on the data characteristics resulting from the temporal splitting strategy. We
studied the shift in label and descriptor space over time, mainly concentrating on the differences between TB and
ADME-T assays. The shift in label space was assessed by comparing the ratios of the preferred class in each time span.
Shifts in the descriptor space were quantified using the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [72], which provides a
kernel-based estimate for the distance between the ECFP spaces of two datasets. The MMD between a training dataset
X := {x1 , ..., xM } and a test dataset Z := {z1 , ..., zN } distributed according to P (X) and Q(Z) can be computed
with

                                     M M                        N N                       M N
                                 1 XX                       1 XX                      1 XX
             M M D(P, Q) =                  k(xi , x j ) +             k(zi , zj ) −             k(xi , zj ).           (5)
                                M 2 i=1 j=1                N 2 i=1 j=1               M N i=1 j=1

When using the Tanimoto coefficient [73] as kernel, the MMD lies between 0 and 1, with 0 indicating no differences
and 1 indicating no shared features between the compounds in the datasets.
The second part of the study aims to determine how well different uncertainty quantification methods estimate the
probability that compounds have a certain desirable feature, such as being active on a TB assay or inactive on an
ADME-T toxicity assay. To compare the models, the AUC under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve [74]
(AUC [↑]), the binary cross-entropy (BCE [↓]) and the adaptive calibration error [75] (ACE [↓]) of the predictions were
calculated. The predictions were ordered and assigned to ten bins to obtain the calibration error. Subsequently, the
difference between the mean probabilities and the ratio of the instances belonging to the preferred class was computed
for each bin. The ACE was calculated by taking the mean of the differences in the bins. Another commonly used
calibration error is the expected calibration error, which is similar to the ACE but uses equally spaced instead of
equally sized bins [75]. However, this binning strategy can overestimate the calibration error when handling imbalanced
datasets due to the high variance of the predictions in the sparsely populated bins [75]. In this context, the ACE
provides a more robust estimate of the calibration error and is, therefore, the preferred estimator for the probability
calibration error in this study. Note that the ACE is an improper score [76, 77], so a perfect calibration error of 0 does
not automatically correspond to the best model. Thus, the ACE was always evaluated in combination with the BCE for
a more comprehensive analysis. The performance of the approaches was assessed by generating ten model repetitions
and obtaining the mean score of the respective evaluation metric. A two-sided, independent t-test was used to assess
whether the difference between the best and any other model was statistically significant.




                                                             8
    Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




Figure 4: Quantification of the distribution shifts between the training and test datasets over time. The shift in
label space and in the descriptor space is illustrated for each temporal setting, using the data of 1, 2, or 3 time spans for
training. Results are shown for each assay. The left panel shows the shift in label space in terms of the difference in
ratios of the preferred class between the training and test datasets. The right panel shows the MMD in the descriptor
space between the training and test datasets for each temporal setting and assay, quantifying shifts in descriptor space.


3      Results and Discussion

We divide the results of this study into two consecutive parts to investigate the efficacy of uncertainty quantification and
probability calibration methods using real-world temporal data. The first part addresses the properties of the data in
the context of a distribution shift in the label and descriptor space. In the second section, we compare the probability
calibration of various uncertainty quantification methods and set the results in context with the underlying distribution
shift resulting from the temporal split.

3.1     Distribution Shifts over Time

Shift in Label Space. The ratios of the preferred class in different time spans of an assay were compared to evaluate
shifts in the label space. The left panel in Figures 4 illustrates the distribution shift in label space by plotting the
difference between the ratios of the preferred class in the training and the test set for each assay. The ratio of the
preferred class in each time span is listed for all assays in Table 4 in the appendix. We assessed all three temporal
settings, using one, two, or three time spans as training data. The second consecutive span after the training data was
considered the test set. We refer to Figure 2 for a more comprehensive explanation of the different training settings.
The left heatmap of Figure 4 shows that TB assays evolve differently in label space over time than ADME-T assays.
Generally, the differences in preferred class ratios between the training and test sets are smaller in ADME-T assays,
while the more extreme values in TB assays indicate larger shifts in label space. Recall that the TB category includes
project-based assays, which aim to find modulators for a specific target of interest. Therefore, a plausible explanation
for the larger shifts in label space could be that various chemical series are tested in search of promising compounds.
These series may differ in their abilities to modulate a target, leading to changing ratios of preferred compounds over
time. Some assays show an enrichment of the preferred class over time, as observed in TB-3 and TB-6. However,
this pattern was not observed in all assays, and the TB-1 and TB-7 assays even show opposite tendencies. The more
stable ratios in the ADME-T assays can be attributed to the nature of this assay category, as well. These assays are not


                                                               9
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




Figure 5: T-SNE plots of the ECFP space. T-SNE plots of the ECFP space are shown for one example of each assay
category to illustrate how the explored chemical space changes over time. Compounds are colored according to the
time span that they were assigned to. The t-SNE plot of the remaining TB and ADME-T assays are shown in Figures 9
and 10 in the appendix.


specific to individual projects and are used to evaluate the pharmacokinetic and toxicity profiles of compounds. Based
on the results above, it is highly questionable whether the i.i.d. assumption for these assays remains valid over time,
particularly in the TB category. This category includes some challenging assays, such as TB-3 and TB-7, which exhibit
significant label shifts.

Shift in Descriptor Space. The shifts in ECFP space are visualized using two-dimensional t-SNE plots to reveal
patterns and clusters in the dataset. The t-SNE plots for TB-7 and A-CYPb are shown in Figure 5, while the plots for the
remaining assays can be found in Figures 9 and 10 in the appendix. Figure 5 reveals a clear pattern in the TB-7 assay,
which indicates a shift in the chemical space over the assay history. Furthermore, chemically similar compounds tend to
be assigned to the same time span, as indicated by the color purity in various clusters. In contrast, the t-SNE plot of the
ADME-T assay does not show a clear pattern in clusters and color gradients. To quantify the shift in descriptor space,
the MMD was calculated between the training and test set. The MMD of the three temporal settings is shown in the
right panel of Figure 4. The observed tendencies are similar to the patterns reported for the label shifts. In general, the
TB assays exhibit larger shifts than the ADME-T assays, which is also supported by the patterns seen in the t-SNE plots.
These results can be again explained by the different characteristics of the two assay categories, resulting in distinct
developments through the descriptor space over time. To find promising compounds in the TB assays, various chemical
series are usually screened, containing chemically similar compounds. As a result, large shifts are observed when
comparing the descriptor space of compounds assigned to different time spans. In conclusion, the shifts in descriptor
space are more pronounced in TB assays, while those in ADME-T assays are comparatively small. Similar to the shifts
in label space, the i.i.d. assumption might not be appropriate, particularly in the TB assays.

3.2   Probability Calibration Study

We assessed the performance of various uncertainty estimation methods in three experiments, focusing on the probability
calibration of the models. Throughout this part of the study, the model performance is assessed separately for TB and
ADME-T assays. The first experiment compares the baseline approaches, and the uncertainty quantification approaches
limited to the third temporal setting, in which three time spans were used as training datasets. The second section
investigates the change in model performances over time by comparing the three temporal settings. Moreover, the
results will be linked to the assay-specific conclusions about the label and data shift drawn in Section 3.1. The third
experiment concentrates on the potential of post hoc probability calibration methods in the context of distribution shifts
between the calibration and test sets. The results of the majority of models are presented. The numerical results of all
methods are listed in Section D in the appendix.


                                                            10
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models


Table 2: Summary of AUC results for the third temporal setting. AUC results for the baselines (RF and MLP) and
train-time uncertainty quantification models (MLPE, MLPMC, and BNN) are reported. The models were trained with
compounds from three time spans. The mean and standard deviation of 10 model repetitions are shown. The best-
performing approach and those not significantly different from it, as determined by a two-sided t-test, are highlighted in
bold.

                             RF               MLP                MLPE            MLPMC               BNN
          Target-Based
          TB-1      0.437 ± 0.025        0.586 ± 0.065      0.614 ± 0.006     0.592 ± 0.061     0.502 ± 0.024
          TB-2      0.778 ± 0.018         0.793 ± 0.01      0.795 ± 0.002      0.791 ± 0.01     0.289 ± 0.026
          TB-3      0.708 ± 0.023        0.765 ± 0.009      0.768 ± 0.001     0.761 ± 0.009      0.73 ± 0.002
          TB-4      0.909 ± 0.027         0.95 ± 0.007        0.956 ± 0.0     0.952 ± 0.003     0.957 ± 0.001
          TB-5      0.676 ± 0.028        0.896 ± 0.008         0.9 ± 0.001    0.897 ± 0.008      0.78 ± 0.171
          TB-6       0.641 ± 0.06        0.768 ± 0.007      0.771 ± 0.001     0.768 ± 0.007     0.701 ± 0.007
          TB-7      0.533 ± 0.086         0.71 ± 0.026      0.718 ± 0.004      0.718 ± 0.03     0.479 ± 0.014
          ADME-T
          A-CYPa 0.675 ± 0.015           0.625 ± 0.013      0.627 ± 0.002     0.625 ± 0.013     0.622 ± 0.016
          A-CYPb 0.581 ± 0.012           0.644 ± 0.005      0.648 ± 0.001     0.643 ± 0.006     0.661 ± 0.001
          A-CYPc 0.631 ± 0.024           0.714 ± 0.003         0.714 ± 0.0    0.715 ± 0.003     0.734 ± 0.003
          A-PM   0.613 ± 0.031           0.769 ± 0.004       0.77 ± 0.001     0.765 ± 0.004     0.784 ± 0.023
          A-SOL  0.692 ± 0.008            0.78 ± 0.011      0.792 ± 0.002     0.779 ± 0.013     0.511 ± 0.011
          A-hERG 0.632 ± 0.009           0.729 ± 0.005      0.735 ± 0.001     0.729 ± 0.005     0.652 ± 0.003
          A-logD 0.641 ± 0.015           0.833 ± 0.003      0.839 ± 0.002     0.834 ± 0.003     0.828 ± 0.004
          A-MS   0.694 ± 0.006              0.71 ± 0.01     0.716 ± 0.003     0.713 ± 0.006     0.745 ± 0.007



Comparison of Uncertainty Estimation Methods. We compared the predictive performance of RF, MLP, MLPE,
MLPMC, and BNN in terms of AUC, BCE, and ACE. For a straightforward comparison, we limit the reported results
to the third temporal setting, in which three time spans were used for model training. The data assigned to the last time
span was used as a test set. The AUC values of the models are listed in Table 2. The AUC results for the TB assays
show that the MLPs, as well as the non-bayesian uncertainty estimation methods, outperform the RFs and BNNs on
most datasets. In more detail, the MLPE model is always among the best approaches. The MLP and the MLPMC
models retrieve results that are not statistically different from the best in 6 and 5 out of 7 datasets. The BNN is the best
model for assay TB-4, while the RF approach is consistently outperformed. In contrast, the results for the ADME-T
assays show that either the MLPEs, or the BNNs, or both outperform the other approaches in 7 out of 8 assays. The
remaining assay is A-CYPa, for which the RF approach achieves the best result.
The model calibration is analyzed using the ACE and the BCE scores. The results are illustrated in Figure 6. The
analysis of the BCE and ACE values reveals trends similar to those observed in the AUC scores. The results of the
models trained on TB assays show that the MLPE approach is among the best-performing approaches for all datasets,
except for TB-1, for which MLPMC performs best in terms of ACE. The baseline MLP matches the performance of
MLPE in 4 out of 7 times in terms of BCE and in 5 out of 7 assays in terms of ACE. Furthermore, the models perform
overall worse on TB-1 and TB-2 in terms of BCE. A reason for this result could be the small dataset size of these
two assays, which might lead to overfitting and, therefore, poorer calibration of the models. Furthermore, both assays
exhibit comparatively large shifts in label and descriptor space, as shown in Figure 4, which introduces additional
difficulties in generalizing well over time. The results of the models trained on the ADME-T data demonstrate the
superiority of the MLPE and BNN methods. More specifically, in all assays, either MLPE or the BNN performs best
with regard to BCE and ACE. A-CYPa is the only exception for which RF and MLPMC perform best. The MLPE and
BNN models achieve the best results across both metrics in the same number of assays, namely in 4 out of 8 cases.
It is surprising that the more sophisticated uncertainty estimation methods improve the probability calibration of the
baselines trained on AMDE-T assays but fail to do so for models trained on TB category datasets. The MLPE and
the BNN approaches account for epistemic uncertainty by including model variance in their predictions. The deep
ensemble approach retrieves model samples representing different local minima of the loss surface, while the BNNs
model the neural network weights as probability distributions. These characteristics should enable the models to detect
out-of-distribution test instances that are dissimilar from the training instances. As reported in Section 3.1, the shifts
innate to assays in the TB category are comparatively large, which leads to the assumption that these approaches
enhance probability calibration for these assays. However, for most TB assays, the uncertainty estimation methods do
not improve the quality of uncertainty estimates for the baseline MLPs. Koh et al. [42] showed that the performance of


                                                            11
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




 BCE




 ACE




                            Assay                                                 Assay

Figure 6: Summary of BCE and ACE scores for the third temporal setting. The first column shows the results for
TB assays, while the second one reports the performance of models trained on ADME-T assays. BCE scores are plotted
in the first, and ACE scores in the second row. Results for the baselines (RF and MLP) and train-time uncertainty
quantification models (MLPE, MLPMC, and BNN) are reported. The models were trained with compounds from three
time spans. The results of 10 model repetitions were aggregated. For each assay, the best-performing approach and
those not significantly different from it, as determined by a two-sided t-test, are marked with an asterisk.


a classifier can degrade significantly when there is a distribution shift between the source and target domains. Moreover,
Garg et al. [78] reported specifically for the presence of label shift, that a classifier that is ideal for the source domain
might no longer be ideal for the target domain. In general, deep ensemble approaches have been shown to outperform
other uncertainty estimation approaches, including approximate Bayesian neural networks, in terms of predictive
accuracy and calibration without [79] and under distribution shift in the descriptor space [41, 80]. These conclusions
are supported by the results in this study, that show that MLPE performs better than other uncertainty estimation
under distribution shift. However, despite being the best uncertainty estimation approach, the MLPE models rarely
outperform the baseline MLP in the presence of distribution shift. An additional reason for the failure of the uncertainty
estimation methods to generate better uncertainty estimates that the baseline could be their inability to handle the shifts
in label space well. This conclusion might be transferrable to model calibration, thus explaining the difference between
architectures trained on TB and ADME-T assays to produce better-calibrated probabilities. A large study that compared
uncertainty estimation approaches used for regression models trained on the same dataset also reported that the deep
ensemble and Bayesian neural network approaches outperform other common uncertainty estimation approaches for
regression [49]. In contrast to the classification setting, the uncertainty estimates of baselines trained with TB assays
could also be improved in the regression study. This observation could indicate that uncertainty estimation models
for regression tasks are less sensitive to shifts in the label space than approaches for classification. A reason for this
observation could be that the model can access the actual values of the measurements in the regression setting, which
might attenuate the shift in the target space. For example, strongly inactive and weakly inactive compounds exhibit
different target values for regression models, while this information is lost in classification tasks due to the application
of binary classification thresholds.

Uncertainty Estimation over Time. We assessed the quality of the uncertainty estimates over time by comparing
the model performance in all three temporal settings. The results are displayed in Figure 7. The plots show that the
model performance in one time span rarely allows conclusions about the performance of the same approach at another
point in time. In 3 out of 7 TB assays, a single model is always among the models with the best BCE score in all three
temporal settings. These approaches include MLPMC for TB-1, MLP for TB-6, and MLPE for TB-7. Regarding the
ACE scores, the MLPE is consistently among the best methods for TB-2, and the MLP is among the best for TB-3.
The BCE results of the ADME-T assays show consistent results over time for 4 assays, including the RFs for A-CYPa
and the MLPE approach for A-PM, A-SOL, and A-hERG. The ACE results of the ADME-T assays reveal a consistent
model performance in 2 out of 8 assays, namely the MLPs for A-PM and the MLPE for A-hERG. In general, model
performance in terms of ACE is slightly less stable over time than in terms of BCE. Interestingly, Svensson et al. [49]


                                                            12
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




Figure 7: Summary of BCE and ACE scores across all temporal settings. The first two columns show the ACE
and BCE scores for TB assays, while the last two report the performance of models trained on ADME-T assays. The
temporal setting is indicated in brackets after the assay abbreviation. Results for the baselines (RF and MLP) and
train-time uncertainty quantification models (MLPE, MLPMC, and BNN) are reported. The models were trained with
compounds from three time spans. Averages over 10 model repetitions are shown. For each assay, the best-performing
approach and those not significantly different from it, as determined by a two-sided t-test, are marked with an asterisk.


applied regression modeling techniques to the same data and reported more consistent model performance for the
ADME-T assays.
Plotting the model performance on all temporal settings confirms the conclusions drawn in Section 3.2. The MLP
and MLPE methods obtain the best results in terms of both BCE and ACE for the TB assays. Both are among the
best-performing approaches in at least one temporal setting in all assays, except TB-4, where MLP is not among the
best models in any setting. Interestingly, regarding the BCE results, the MLP is as often among the best models as the
MLPEs, namely for 13 out of the 21 settings. The ACE scores reveal a similar result. MLP is among the best methods
for 11 and MLPE for 13 out of 21 settings. All other approaches trained on the TB assays are much less often among
the best-performing models. The results for the ADME-T assays also support the results from the previous experiment.
Concerning the ACE scores, the MLPE and BNNs outperform all other models, with MLPE being among the best
methods for 13 and BNN for 11 out of 24 settings. The MLPs and the MLPMCs are among the best-calibrated methods
in 5 and 7 settings, respectively. The MLPEs outperform the other approaches in terms of BCE, obtaining significant
results in 13 settings. The MLPMCs are among the best methods in 8, and the BNNs in 7 out of 24 settings.
In conclusion, the MLPE approach generates the best-performing models for most ADME-T assays. Considering
the high computational resources required to train these MLPEs, another good choice are BNNs. This approach is
much more time—and resource-effective and generates well-calibrated models for many ADME-T datasets. Note
that a fixed variance was chosen for the Gaussian prior and that tuning this hyperparameter could even improve the
performance of the BNNs. Given that deep ensemble models always lead to more underconfident predictions [81],
the good performance of these methods indicates overfitting of the baselines. The MLPEs and BNNs counteract this
behavior for the ADME-T assays but not for datasets from the TB category. The ACE values for TB assays are higher
than for the ADME-T assays, as illustrated in Figure 6, indicating worse model calibration. This result indicates room
for improvement in probability calibration and eliminates good baseline model calibration as a reason for the inability
of MLPE and BNN to improve the ACE of the MLP. An alternative reason for the failure of MLPEs and BNNs could be
the shift in label space which is considerably larger for TB assays. Based on these results, it is questionable whether the
costly generation of MLPEs for improved uncertainty estimation is justified for datasets with large distribution shifts,


                                                            13
  Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




 ACE




                               Assay                                                 Assay
                     (   MDD: Validation vs Test)                          (   MDD: Validation vs Test)

Figure 8: Summary of ACE scores of post-hoc probability calibration approaches using the third temporal setting.
The left panel shows the ACE scores of models trained on TB assays, while the right panel reports the ACE performance
of ADME-T models. The assays in each panel are ordered according to increasing distribution shifts in descriptor space
between the calibration and the training set. The distribution shift is determined by the maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) between the two datasets using the Tanimoto coefficient on the ECFP space determines the distribution shift.
Results for the deep ensembles (MLPE), the Platt scaled deep-ensembles (MLPE-P), and the ensembles calibrated
with a Venn-ABERS predictor (MLPE-VA) are reported. The models were trained with compounds from three time
spans. The results of 10 model repetitions were aggregated. For each assay, the best-performing approach and those not
significantly different from it, as determined by a two-sided t-test, are marked with an asterisk.




such as the TB data. As discussed in Section 3.2, this shift might be difficult to handle for the uncertainty quantification
methods, resulting in the incapability of uncertainty quantification methods to improve the probability calibration.



Post hoc Probability Calibration. The effects of two post hoc calibration methods, Platt scaling and Venn-ABERS
predictors, were assessed. Furthermore, the distribution shift between calibration and test set was taken into account
by obtaining the MMD between the two datasets. The MMD between the calibration and test dataset is reported in
Table 5 in the appendix. For the sake of clarity, we only include the results of the third temporal setting for the MLPE
approach, which was reported to be one of the best-performing models in previous sections of this study. Only the
ACE is reported since the post hoc calibration step includes the application of monotonous increasing functions, which
cannot correct non-monotonous distortions and, therefore, does not change the ranking of the predictions. Hence, these
approaches only affect the probability calibration while the AUC scores of the models remain constant. The results
of all calibrated models across all temporal settings and assays can be found in Section D of the appendix. Figure 8
shows the performance of the Platt-scaled MLPEs (MLPE-P) and the MLPEs calibrated with Venn-ABERS predictors
(MLP-VA). The results are shown separately for TB and ADME-T assays, and the assays are ordered according to
increasing MMD values. In general, post hoc scaling leads to better results in 4 out of 7 TB assays and in 4 out of 8
ADME-T assays. In 4 out of these 8 cases, both MLPE-P and MLPE-VA are the best models, while in 4 cases, either
MLPE-P or MLPE-VA perform best. Both panels in Figure 8 show, that with increasing MMD between calibration
and test set, the calibrating abilities of the post hoc calibration methods decrease. A stronger trend can be detected for
the TB assays, for which the shifts are larger than for the ADME-T assays. Nevertheless, the pattern is also visible in
the right panel plotting the results for ADME-T, which show no improvements after post hoc calibration for assays
with large MMD, like A-CYPc and A-CYPa. The reported trends can also be seen for other approaches, albeit less
clearly for some models. An intuitive explanation for this pattern is that post hoc probability approaches perform better
if the training set is similar to the test set, and worse if the training and test set are different. Ovadia et al. [41] showed
that post hoc calibration approaches improve model calibration in the i.i.d. setting. However, their calibrating abilities
degrade as the data shift increases so that they are ultimately outperformed by train-time uncertainty quantification
methods in the presence of large shifts. These findings are supported by the post hoc calibration results in this study,
which shows for small shifts good calibrating properties of the post hoc calibration methods, while for larger shifts,
they are outperformed by the train-time versions of the methods.


                                                             14
    Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



4      Conclusions
Uncertainty estimation emerges as a critical tool in the cost- and resource-intensive drug discovery process, facilitating
the evaluation of experimental risks and costs. In this framework, the quality of the uncertainty estimates is crucial
to ensure the reliability of the models. This study evaluates uncertainty estimation approaches for classification tasks
in a practical, real-world context. A temporal splitting strategy was applied to internal data from a pharmaceutical
company to simulate the evolution of drug-target interaction data through time. Our findings offer valuable insights into
uncertainty estimation and highlight the challenges posed by real-world applications.
The analysis of the pharmaceutical data showed that the distribution shifts in label and descriptor space over time strongly
depended on the nature of the individual assays. The project-specific TB assays exhibited more pronounced distribution
shifts, while the more abundantly used toxicity screens and assays assessing the pharmacodynamic properties (ADME-T
assays) showed moderate and more stable shifts in descriptor space and little shift in label space over time. These
results suggest that the i.i.d. assumption might not be accurate, especially for target-specific assays with larger shifts in
label- and descriptor space.
A comparison of common uncertainty quantification methods revealed that the deep ensembles and the Bayesian
neural network achieved the best-calibrated results for ADME-T assays that show small distribution shifts in the data.
Recently, these two approaches have also been shown to outperform other common uncertainty quantification methods
in regression tasks [49]. Given that training deep ensembles demand a lot of computational resources, Bayesian neural
networks might be the best choice when striving for a fast method that produces well-calibrated estimates. For TB
assays exhibiting more pronounced distribution shifts, the deep ensemble method performed best. However, the baseline
MLP matched the performance of the uncertainty quantification methods for many datasets. In general, the uncertainty
quantification methods consider epistemic uncertainty, resulting in less confident predictions for test instances that are
different from the training data. This leads to the assumption that the inability of the uncertainty estimation approaches
to produce well-calibrated uncertainties for TB assays might result from the shifts in label space rather than shifts in
descriptor space. However, due to the high computational effort required to train deep ensembles, choosing a simple
MLP for assays with large distribution shifts might be the best and most efficient solution.
The analysis of the performance of uncertainty estimation approaches over time showed that it is difficult to draw
conclusions from results from one point of time in the assay history to another. In general, model performance
was unstable over time. Only for a few assays could one method be identified that was among the best-performing
approaches at all considered time points in the assay history. In conclusion, a reevaluation of classification model
performance is required for all assays as soon as more recent data is added. Interestingly, the performance of regression
models is more stable over time for ADME-T assays, as shown recently by Svensson et al. [49].
Lastly, two post hoc calibration approaches, including Platt scaling and Venn-ABERS predictors, were tested on their
ability to improve the probability calibration of deep ensembles. Overall, the calibration methods were able to achieve
better-calibrated results for some assays, while for others, the calibration stayed the same or even deteriorated after the
post hoc calibration step. The calibrating capabilities were dependent on the distribution shift between the calibration
and test set, with declining performance when the shifts in the descriptor space increase.
The uncertainty estimation approaches discussed in this study have been previously demonstrated to improve model
calibration on toy data or datasets that do not account for the distribution shift caused by the evolution of the data
over time. However, previous studies show that improved performance on i.i.d. data often fails to translate into better
outcomes under distribution shift [41, 42], which is also supported by the findings in this study. This study highlights the
challenges introduced by real-world data, emphasizing the complexity of identifying effective strategies for uncertainty
estimation in QSAR models.

Acknowledgements
The authors sincerely thank their colleagues for the useful discussions. Special appreciation goes to András Formanek
and Antoine Passemiers at KU Leuven for their valuable insights. This study was partially funded by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions grant agreement
“Advanced machine learning for Innovative Drug Discovery (AIDD)” No. 956832. HRF, and AA are affiliated to
Leuven.AI and received funding from the Flemish Government (AI Research Program).




                                                               15
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



References
 [1] Natesh Singh, Philippe Vayer, Shivalika Tanwar, Jean-Luc Poyet, Katya Tsaioun, and Bruno O Villoutreix. Drug
     discovery and development: introduction to the general public and patient groups. Frontiers in Drug Discovery, 3:
     1201419, 2023.
 [2] Ute Laermann-Nguyen and Martin Backfisch. Innovation crisis in the pharmaceutical industry? a survey. SN
     Business & Economics, 1(12):164, 2021.
 [3] Anastasiia V Sadybekov and Vsevolod Katritch. Computational approaches streamlining drug discovery. Nature,
     616(7958):673–685, 2023.
 [4] Robert P Hertzberg and Andrew J Pope. High-Throughput Screening: New Technology for the 21st Century.
     Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 4(4):445–451, 2000.
 [5] Kevin Bleakley and Yoshihiro Yamanishi. Supervised Prediction of Drug–Target Interactions Using Bipartite
     Local Models. Bioinform., 25(18):2397–2403, 2009.
 [6] George Apostolakis. The Concept of Probability in Safety Assessments of Technological Systems. Science, 250
     (4986):1359–1364, 1990.
 [7] Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: an introduction
     to concepts and methods. Machine Learning, 110:457 – 506, 2019. doi:10.1007/s10994-021-05946-3.
 [8] Cornelia Gruber, Patrick Oliver Schenk, Malte Schierholz, Frauke Kreuter, and Göran Kauermann. Sources of
     uncertainty in machine learning – a statisticians’ view, 2023.
 [9] Radford M Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks, volume 118. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[10] Charles Blundell, Julien Cornebise, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Weight uncertainty in neural network.
     In International conference on machine learning, pages 1613–1622. PMLR, 2015.
[11] Pavel Izmailov, Sharad Vikram, Matthew D Hoffman, and Andrew Gordon Gordon Wilson. What are bayesian
     neural network posteriors really like? In International conference on machine learning, pages 4629–4640. PMLR,
     2021.
[12] QHwan Kim, Joon-Hyuk Ko, Sunghoon Kim, Nojun Park, and Wonho Jhe. Bayesian neural network with
     pretrained protein embedding enhances prediction accuracy of drug-protein interaction. Bioinformatics, 37(20):
     3428–3435, 2021.
[13] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncer-
     tainty estimation using deep ensembles. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
     S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Cur-
     ran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/
     9ef2ed4b7fd2c810847ffa5fa85bce38-Paper.pdf.
[14] Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in
     deep learning. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Proceedings of The 33rd International
     Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1050–1059,
     New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/gal16.
     html.
[15] Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and distribution-free
     uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.
[16] Vianney Taquet, Vincent Blot, Thomas Morzadec, Louis Lacombe, and Nicolas Brunel. Mapie: an open-source
     library for distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12274, 2022.
[17] Murat Sensoy, Lance Kaplan, and Melih Kandemir. Evidential deep learning to quantify classification uncertainty.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
[18] Ruixuan Wang, Zhikang Liu, Jiahao Gong, Qingping Zhou, Xiaoqing Guan, and Guangbo Ge. An uncertainty-
     guided deep learning method facilitates rapid screening of cyp3a4 inhibitors. Journal of Chemical Information
     and Modeling, 63(24):7699–7710, 2023.
[19] Dong Wang, Zhenxing Wu, Chao Shen, Lingjie Bao, Hao Luo, Zhe Wang, Hucheng Yao, De-Xin Kong, Cheng
     Luo, and Tingjun Hou. Learning with uncertainty to accelerate the discovery of histone lysine-specific demethylase
     1a (kdm1a/lsd1) inhibitors. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 24(1):bbac592, 2023.
[20] Dongpin Oh and Bonggun Shin. Improving evidential deep learning via multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pages 7895–7903, 2022.


                                                            16
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



[21] Ava P Soleimany, Alexander Amini, Samuel Goldman, Daniela Rus, Sangeeta N Bhatia, and Connor W Coley.
     Evidential deep learning for guided molecular property prediction and discovery. ACS central science, 7(8):
     1356–1367, 2021.
[22] Jeremiah Liu, Zi Lin, Shreyas Padhy, Dustin Tran, Tania Bedrax Weiss, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Simple
     and principled uncertainty estimation with deterministic deep learning via distance awareness. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 33:7498–7512, 2020.
[23] John Platt. Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized likelihood methods.
     Adv. Large Margin Classif., 10, 06 1999.
[24] Vladimir Vovk and Ivan Petej. Venn-abers predictors, 2014.
[25] Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Transforming classifier scores into accurate multiclass probability estimates.
     In Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining,
     pages 694–699, 2002.
[26] Lewis H. Mervin, Simon Johansson, Elizaveta Semenova, Kathryn A. Giblin, and Ola Engkvist. Un-
     certainty quantification in drug design. Drug Discovery Today, 26(2):474–489, 2021. ISSN 1359-6446.
     doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2020.11.027.
[27] Jie Yu, Dingyan Wang, and Mingyue Zheng. Uncertainty quantification: Can we trust artificial intelligence in
     drug discovery? Iscience, 25(8), 2022.
[28] Victor Dheur and Souhaib Ben Taieb. A large-scale study of probabilistic calibration in neural network regression.
     In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7813–7836. PMLR, 2023.
[29] Kajetan Schweighofer, Lukas Aichberger, Mykyta Ielanskyi, Günter Klambauer, and Sepp Hochreiter. Quantifica-
     tion of uncertainty with adversarial models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:19446–19484,
     2023.
[30] Lewis H Mervin, Maria-Anna Trapotsi, Avid M Afzal, Ian P Barrett, Andreas Bender, and Ola Engkvist.
     Probabilistic random forest improves bioactivity predictions close to the classification threshold by taking into
     account experimental uncertainty. Journal of Cheminformatics, 13:1–17, 2021.
[31] Milad Rayka, Morteza Mirzaei, and Ali Mohammad Latifi. An ensemble-based approach to estimate confidence
     of predicted protein–ligand binding affinity values. Molecular Informatics, 43(4):e202300292, 2024.
[32] Zhehuan Fan, Jie Yu, Xiang Zhang, Yijie Chen, Shihui Sun, Yuanyuan Zhang, Mingan Chen, Fu Xiao, Wenyong
     Wu, Xutong Li, et al. Reducing overconfident errors in molecular property classification using posterior network.
     Patterns, 2024.
[33] Hannah Rosa Friesacher, Ola Engkvist, Lewis Mervin, Yves Moreau, and Adam Arany. Achieving well-informed
     decision-making in drug discovery: A comprehensive calibration study using neural network-based structure-
     activity models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14185, 2024.
[34] Lior Hirschfeld, Kyle Swanson, Kevin Yang, Regina Barzilay, and Connor W Coley. Uncertainty quantification
     using neural networks for molecular property prediction. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 60(8):
     3770–3780, 2020.
[35] Lewis H. Mervin, Avid M. Afzal, Ola Engkvist, and Andreas Bender. Comparison of scaling methods to obtain
     calibrated probabilities of activity for protein–ligand predictions. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling,
     60(10):4546–4559, 2020. doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00476. PMID: 32865408.
[36] Thomas-Martin Dutschmann, Lennart Kinzel, Antonius Ter Laak, and Knut Baumann. Large-scale evaluation of
     k-fold cross-validation ensembles for uncertainty estimation. Journal of Cheminformatics, 15(1):49, 2023.
[37] Robert P Sheridan. Time-split cross-validation as a method for estimating the goodness of prospective prediction.
     J. Chem. Inf. Model., 53(4):783–790, 2013. doi:10.1021/ci400084k.
[38] Gregory A Landrum, Maximilian Beckers, Jessica Lanini, Nadine Schneider, Nikolaus Stiefl, and Sereina Riniker.
     Simpd: an algorithm for generating simulated time splits for validating machine learning approaches. Journal of
     cheminformatics, 15(1):119, 2023.
[39] Murat Dundar, Balaji Krishnapuram, Jinbo Bi, and R Bharat Rao. Learning classifiers when the training data is
     not iid. In IJCAI, volume 2007, pages 756–61. Citeseer, 2007.
[40] Longbing Cao. Beyond iid: Non-iid thinking, informatics, and learning. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 37(4):5–17,
     2022.


                                                            17
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



[41] Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, D. Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua Dillon, Bal-
     aji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model's uncertainty? evaluating predic-
     tive uncertainty under dataset shift. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc,
     E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Cur-
     ran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
     8558cb408c1d76621371888657d2eb1d-Paper.pdf.
[42] Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsubramani,
     Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A benchmark of in-the-wild
     distribution shifts. In International conference on machine learning, pages 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
[43] Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural networks. In
     Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
     volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1321–1330. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL
     https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/guo17a.html.
[44] Robert P Sheridan. Three Useful Dimensions for Domain Applicability in QSAR Models Using Random Forest.
     J. Chem. Inf. Model., 52(3):814–823, 2012.
[45] Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil and Rich Caruana. Predicting good probabilities with supervised learning. In
     Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning, pages 625–632, 2005.
[46] Barbara Zdrazil, Eloy Felix, Fiona Hunter, Emma J Manners, James Blackshaw, Sybilla Corbett, Marleen de Veij,
     Harris Ioannidis, David Mendez Lopez, Juan F Mosquera, et al. The chembl database in 2023: a drug discovery
     platform spanning multiple bioactivity data types and time periods. Nucleic acids research, 52(D1):D1180–D1192,
     2024.
[47] Raquel Rodríguez-Pérez, Markus Trunzer, Nadine Schneider, Bernard Faller, and Gregori Gerebtzoff. Multispecies
     machine learning predictions of in vitro intrinsic clearance with uncertainty quantification analyses. Molecular
     Pharmaceutics, 20(1):383–394, 2022.
[48] Raya Stoyanova, Paul Maximilian Katzberger, Leonid Komissarov, Aous Khadhraoui, Lisa Sach-Peltason,
     Katrin Groebke Zbinden, Torsten Schindler, and Nenad Manevski. Computational predictions of nonclinical
     pharmacokinetics at the drug design stage. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 63(2):442–458, 2023.
[49] Emma Svensson, Hannah Rosa Friesacher, Susanne Winiwarter, Lewis Mervin, Adam Arany, and Ola En-
     gkvist. Enhancing uncertainty quantification in drug discovery with censored regression labels. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2409.04313, 2024.
[50] Hannah Rosa Friesacher, Emma Svensson, Adam Arany, Lewis Mervin, and Ola Engkvist. Towards reliable
     uncertainty estimates for drug discovery: A large-scale temporal study of probability calibration. In ICML 2024
     AI for Science Workshop, 2024.
[51] Hannah Rosa Friesacher, Emma Svensson, Adam Arany, Lewis Mervin, and Ola Engkvist. Temporal evaluation
     of probability calibration with experimental errors. In International Workshop on AI in Drug Discovery, pages
     13–20. Springer, 2024.
[52] Joseph A DiMasi. Risks in new drug development: approval success rates for investigational drugs. Clinical
     Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 69(5):297–307, 2001.
[53] Han Van De Waterbeemd and Eric Gifford. Admet in silico modelling: towards prediction paradise? Nature
     reviews Drug discovery, 2(3):192–204, 2003.
[54] Malavika Deodhar, Sweilem B Al Rihani, Meghan J Arwood, Lucy Darakjian, Pamela Dow, Jacques Turgeon, and
     Veronique Michaud. Mechanisms of cyp450 inhibition: understanding drug-drug interactions due to mechanism-
     based inhibition in clinical practice. Pharmaceutics, 12(9):846, 2020.
[55] Costas Ioannides. Cytochromes P450: metabolic and toxicological aspects. Crc Press, 1996.
[56] Laura Lowe Furge and F Peter Guengerich. Cytochrome p450 enzymes in drug metabolism and chemical
     toxicology: An introduction. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education, 34(2):66–74, 2006.
[57] Pranav Shah, Viral Jogani, Tamishraha Bagchi, and Ambikanandan Misra. Role of caco-2 cell monolayers in
     prediction of intestinal drug absorption. Biotechnology progress, 22(1):186–198, 2006.
[58] Li Di, Paul V Fish, and Takashi Mano. Bridging solubility between drug discovery and development. Drug
     discovery today, 17(9-10):486–495, 2012.
[59] Mark T Keating and Michael C Sanguinetti. Molecular genetic insights into cardiovascular disease. Science, 272
     (5262):681–685, 1996.
[60] Michael J Waring. Lipophilicity in drug discovery. Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery, 5(3):235–248, 2010.


                                                            18
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



[61] Minjun Chen, Jürgen Borlak, and Weida Tong. High lipophilicity and high daily dose of oral medications are
     associated with significant risk for drug-induced liver injury. Hepatology, 58(1):388–396, 2013.
[62] Collen M Masimirembwa, Richard Thompson, and Tommy B Andersson. In vitro high throughput screening of
     compounds for favorable metabolic properties in drug discovery. Combinatorial chemistry & high throughput
     screening, 4(3):245–263, 2001.
[63] Li Di, Edward H Kerns, Yan Hong, Teresa A Kleintop, Oliver J Mc Connell, and Donna M Huryn. Optimization of
     a higher throughput microsomal stability screening assay for profiling drug discovery candidates. SLAS Discovery,
     8(4):453–462, 2003.
[64] Greg Landrum. Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics, 2006.
[65] David Weininger. SMILES, a Chemical Language and Information System. 1. Introduction to Methodology and
     Encoding Rules. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 28(1):31–36, 1988.
[66] Peter B R Hartog, Emma Svensson, Lewis Mervin, Samuel Genheden, Ola Engkvist, and Igor V Tetko. Registries
     in Machine Learning-Based Drug Discovery: A Shortcut to Code Reuse. In International Workshop on AI in Drug
     Discovery, pages 98–115. Springer, 2024. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72381-0_9.
[67] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss,
     V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn:
     Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[68] Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[69] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In International Conference
     on Learning Representations, 2015.
[70] Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathematical statistics,
     22(1):79–86, 1951.
[71] Paolo Toccaceli, Ilia Nouretdinov, Zhiyuan Luo, Vladimir Vovk, Lars Carlsson, and Alex Gammerman. Excape
     wp1-probabilistic prediction, 2016.
[72] Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A kernel
     two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012.
[73] John D Holliday, CY Hu, and Peter Willett. Grouping of coefficients for the calculation of inter-molecular
     similarity and dissimilarity using 2d fragment bit-strings. Combinatorial chemistry & high throughput screening,
     5(2):155–166, 2002.
[74] James A Hanley and Barbara J McNeil. The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic
     (roc) curve. Radiology, 143(1):29–36, 1982.
[75] Jeremy Nixon, Michael W. Dusenberry, Linchuan Zhang, Ghassen Jerfel, and Dustin Tran. Measuring calibration
     in deep learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
     (CVPR) Workshops, June 2019. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1904.01685.
[76] Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation. Journal
     of the American Statistical Association, 102(477):359–378, 2007. doi:10.1198/016214506000001437. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437.
[77] Jochen Bröcker. Reliability, sufficiency, and the decomposition of proper scores. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
     Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography,
     135(643):1512–1519, 2009.
[78] Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and Zachary Lipton. A unified view of label shift estimation.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:3290–3300, 2020.
[79] Fredrik K Gustafsson, Martin Danelljan, and Thomas B Schon. Evaluating scalable bayesian deep learning
     methods for robust computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
     recognition workshops, pages 318–319, 2020.
[80] Hendrik A Mehrtens, Alexander Kurz, Tabea-Clara Bucher, and Titus J Brinker. Benchmarking common
     uncertainty estimation methods with histopathological images under domain shift and label noise. Medical image
     analysis, 89:102914, 2023.
[81] Rahul Rahaman and Alexandre Thiery. Uncertainty quantification and deep ensembles. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
     imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, volume 34, pages 20063–20075. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
     cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/a70dc40477bc2adceef4d2c90f47eb82-Paper.pdf.


                                                            19
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



A    Model Selection

Table 3: Summary of the hyperparameter optimization strategy. The hyperparameters of the baseline models were
tuned for each temporal setting of each dataset individually using the BCE loss in a validation dataset. The range of the
hyperparameters considered during the hyperparameter tuning is reported in the left column. The right column lists the
fixed hyperparameters for each baseline model.

         Baseline               Tuned Hyperparameter      Explored Values         Fixed Hyperparameter    Values
         Random Forest          Number of Estimators                50 - 1500
                                                                                  ECFP Size                 4096
         (RF)                   Maximum Depth                       5 - 10000
                                Weight Decay                        0 - 0.0005
                                Dropout                                0 - 0.75
         Mulitlayer
                                Hidden Dimension                      64 - 512    ECFP Size                 4096
         Perceptron
                                Number of Layers                           2-5    Learning Rate           0.0001
         (MLP)
                                Decreasing Dimension               True/False
                                Scheduler Factor                       0.1/0.5



B    Distribution Shift in Label Space

Table 4: Overview of ratio of the preferred class. The ratios of the compounds assigned to the preferred class are
reported for each time span and each assay.

                        Assay       Span 1          Span 2          Span 3        Span 4      Span 5
                        TB-1        0.678218     0.531628         0.422665    0.236022     0.355208
                        TB-2        0.336185     0.401515         0.389691    0.304681     0.537486
                        TB-3        0.780019     0.687738         0.789397    0.878903     0.955903
                        TB-4        0.547912     0.869677         0.779412    0.715577     0.760392
                        TB-5        0.102444     0.245645         0.119409    0.176832     0.168000
                        TB-6        0.750672     0.657795         0.747870    0.870065     0.905208
                        TB-7        0.299052     0.717688         0.472853    0.189217     0.079219
                        A-CYPa      0.853501     0.675146         0.775178    0.817248     0.773893
                        A-CYPb      0.856396     0.844581         0.793540    0.823023     0.864290
                        A-CYPc      0.606965     0.761506         0.728951    0.635174     0.707853
                        A-PM        0.186431     0.195426         0.155797    0.096440     0.090965
                        A-SOL       0.470625     0.472610         0.488615    0.525761     0.434304
                        A-hERG      0.559480     0.694663         0.726091    0.719838     0.783182
                        A-logD      0.633528     0.600615         0.608635    0.554792     0.533047
                        A-MS        0.340375     0.333128         0.356558    0.421075     0.365665




                                                             20
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



C   Distribution Shift in Descriptor Space




Figure 9: T-SNE plots of the ECFP space for all TB assays. T-SNE plots of the ECFP space are shown for all TB
assays. Compounds are colored according to the time span that they were assigned to.




Figure 10: T-SNE plots of the ECFP space for all ADME-T assays. T-SNE plots of the ECFP space are shown for all
ADME-T assays. Compounds are colored according to the time span that they were assigned to.




                                                            21
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models



Table 5: Quantification of the label distribution shifts between the calibration and test set. The shift in label space
is reported for each temporal setting, using the data of 1, 2, or 3 time spans for training. Results are shown for each
assay. The shift in label space is shown in terms of the difference in ratios of the preferred class between the training
and test datasets.
                                                     Number of Training Spans
                                    Assay                  1            2            3
                                    TB
                                    TB-1          0.022208       0.016968   0.057858
                                    TB-2          0.018045       0.061332   0.050021
                                    TB-3          0.063842       0.098653   0.073235
                                    TB-4          0.033499       0.043690   0.020273
                                    TB-5          0.088506       0.054487   0.035291
                                    TB-6          0.044372       0.107566   0.062775
                                    TB-7          0.130317       0.095124   0.048923
                                    ADME-T
                                    A-CYPa        0.024293       0.028514   0.016945
                                    A-CYPb        0.018977       0.026954   0.013106
                                    A-CYPc        0.010841       0.010273   0.016587
                                    A-PM          0.015786       0.016645   0.015720
                                    A-SOL         0.006665       0.008250   0.007077
                                    A-hERG        0.004232       0.003890   0.006738
                                    A-logD        0.008009       0.005819   0.007059
                                    A-MS          0.008084       0.006091   0.007487


D    Results of the Calibration Study




                                                            22
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




Table 6: Summary of the BCE (↓) scores for the baseline models. BCE results for all three temporal settings of
all TB and ADME-T assays are reported. The temporal setting is indicated in brackets after the assay abbreviation.
Results for the baselines (Random Forests (RF) and a multilayer perceptron (MLP)), Platt scaled models (RF-P and
MLP-P) and models calibrated with Venn-ABERS (VA) predictors (RF-VA and MLP-VA) are reported. The models
were trained with compounds from three time spans. Averages over 10 model repetitions are shown.
  Assay                  RF            RF-P          RF-VA                MLP          MLP-P         MLP-VA
  TB-1[1]      0.82 ± 0.012     0.7 ± 0.006     0.7 ± 0.006        0.69 ± 0.017   0.64 ± 0.055     0.6 ± 0.064
  TB-1[2]      0.66 ± 0.005    0.51 ± 0.006    0.51 ± 0.012        0.44 ± 0.012   0.43 ± 0.004    0.44 ± 0.005
  TB-1[3]      0.68 ± 0.003    0.81 ± 0.036    0.77 ± 0.011        0.73 ± 0.066    0.77 ± 0.03    0.77 ± 0.036
  TB-2[1]      0.63 ± 0.007    0.61 ± 0.009    0.63 ± 0.015        0.67 ± 0.038   0.67 ± 0.027    0.64 ± 0.006
  TB-2[2]      0.58 ± 0.003    0.56 ± 0.005    0.56 ± 0.006        0.57 ± 0.062   0.54 ± 0.011    0.54 ± 0.009
  TB-2[3]      0.75 ± 0.009     0.8 ± 0.025    0.78 ± 0.024        0.62 ± 0.024   0.66 ± 0.011     0.7 ± 0.013
  TB-3[1]      0.52 ± 0.003    0.64 ± 0.025    0.68 ± 0.016        0.49 ± 0.009   0.56 ± 0.005    0.56 ± 0.008
  TB-3[2]      0.46 ± 0.011    0.38 ± 0.011    0.37 ± 0.009        0.45 ± 0.016   0.44 ± 0.006    0.52 ± 0.093
  TB-3[3]       0.33 ± 0.01     0.2 ± 0.009     0.2 ± 0.013        0.19 ± 0.006   0.21 ± 0.006    0.21 ± 0.004
  TB-4[1]      0.57 ± 0.013    0.39 ± 0.043     0.4 ± 0.067        0.31 ± 0.018   0.31 ± 0.016    0.31 ± 0.007
  TB-4[2]      0.55 ± 0.005     0.45 ± 0.02    0.47 ± 0.011        0.46 ± 0.023   0.46 ± 0.029    0.47 ± 0.021
  TB-4[3]       0.5 ± 0.012    0.33 ± 0.031    0.32 ± 0.037        0.27 ± 0.082   0.24 ± 0.028    0.24 ± 0.038
  TB-5[1]      0.34 ± 0.003    0.41 ± 0.005    0.41 ± 0.021        0.53 ± 0.041   0.39 ± 0.005    0.37 ± 0.003
  TB-5[2]      0.46 ± 0.007    0.48 ± 0.018    0.49 ± 0.018        0.63 ± 0.076   0.53 ± 0.018    0.52 ± 0.024
  TB-5[3]      0.44 ± 0.004    0.42 ± 0.008    0.41 ± 0.011        0.31 ± 0.007   0.28 ± 0.008    0.29 ± 0.006
  TB-6[1]      0.55 ± 0.002    0.64 ± 0.026    0.67 ± 0.029        0.54 ± 0.004   0.65 ± 0.006    0.66 ± 0.007
  TB-6[2]      0.51 ± 0.011    0.43 ± 0.011     0.43 ± 0.02        0.46 ± 0.036   0.44 ± 0.017     0.5 ± 0.062
  TB-6[3]      0.43 ± 0.007     0.3 ± 0.012     0.3 ± 0.012        0.29 ± 0.007   0.28 ± 0.004    0.29 ± 0.003
  TB-7[1]      0.79 ± 0.009    0.73 ± 0.024    0.69 ± 0.032        0.78 ± 0.107   0.72 ± 0.133    0.73 ± 0.125
  TB-7[2]      0.57 ± 0.007    0.54 ± 0.019    0.46 ± 0.036        0.48 ± 0.041   0.47 ± 0.028    0.44 ± 0.016
  TB-7[3]      0.53 ± 0.013    0.32 ± 0.013    0.34 ± 0.031        0.35 ± 0.113   0.28 ± 0.009    0.28 ± 0.011
  A-CYPa[1]    0.54 ± 0.003    0.53 ± 0.005     0.52 ± 0.01         0.55 ± 0.01   0.55 ± 0.007    0.57 ± 0.023
  A-CYPa[2]    0.47 ± 0.002    0.48 ± 0.003     0.5 ± 0.014        0.48 ± 0.004   0.48 ± 0.002     0.5 ± 0.005
  A-CYPa[3]    0.51 ± 0.003    0.51 ± 0.005    0.51 ± 0.005        0.53 ± 0.009   0.53 ± 0.004    0.52 ± 0.005
  A-CYPb[1]    0.51 ± 0.003     0.5 ± 0.007    0.49 ± 0.007        0.49 ± 0.008   0.49 ± 0.003    0.49 ± 0.002
  A-CYPb[2]    0.47 ± 0.001     0.53 ± 0.01    0.56 ± 0.008        0.49 ± 0.015   0.51 ± 0.012     0.52 ± 0.02
  A-CYPb[3]     0.4 ± 0.001     0.4 ± 0.001     0.4 ± 0.002        0.39 ± 0.008   0.39 ± 0.001    0.39 ± 0.002
  A-CYPc[1]     0.6 ± 0.002    0.56 ± 0.005    0.57 ± 0.014        0.59 ± 0.009   0.58 ± 0.003    0.58 ± 0.002
  A-CYPc[2]    0.63 ± 0.005    0.62 ± 0.012     0.6 ± 0.017        0.63 ± 0.027    0.6 ± 0.016     0.6 ± 0.019
  A-CYPc[3]    0.59 ± 0.003    0.62 ± 0.017    0.62 ± 0.016        0.55 ± 0.004   0.56 ± 0.002    0.57 ± 0.002
  A-PM[1]      0.44 ± 0.001    0.43 ± 0.001    0.44 ± 0.004        0.38 ± 0.002   0.38 ± 0.002    0.38 ± 0.002
  A-PM[2]      0.35 ± 0.002    0.33 ± 0.005    0.34 ± 0.006        0.28 ± 0.005    0.3 ± 0.006     0.3 ± 0.023
  A-PM[3]      0.34 ± 0.001     0.3 ± 0.003     0.3 ± 0.005        0.28 ± 0.006   0.27 ± 0.002    0.27 ± 0.002
  A-SOL[1]     0.68 ± 0.001    0.66 ± 0.006    0.66 ± 0.007         0.6 ± 0.002   0.59 ± 0.004    0.59 ± 0.004
  A-SOL[2]     0.68 ± 0.002    0.63 ± 0.007    0.63 ± 0.007         0.61 ± 0.03    0.6 ± 0.031     0.57 ± 0.02
  A-SOL[3]        0.67 ± 0.0   0.64 ± 0.006    0.64 ± 0.006        0.59 ± 0.027   0.58 ± 0.026    0.56 ± 0.013
  A-hERG[1]    0.61 ± 0.002    0.54 ± 0.003    0.54 ± 0.003        0.54 ± 0.024   0.52 ± 0.005    0.51 ± 0.004
  A-hERG[2]    0.59 ± 0.001    0.54 ± 0.004    0.54 ± 0.004         0.5 ± 0.002    0.5 ± 0.003     0.5 ± 0.001
  A-hERG[3]    0.54 ± 0.001     0.5 ± 0.003    0.51 ± 0.004        0.49 ± 0.011   0.48 ± 0.005    0.48 ± 0.004
  A-logD[1]    0.64 ± 0.004     0.62 ± 0.01     0.62 ± 0.01        0.59 ± 0.008   0.57 ± 0.004    0.57 ± 0.003
  A-logD[2]    0.67 ± 0.001    0.64 ± 0.003    0.64 ± 0.002        0.64 ± 0.031   0.62 ± 0.022    0.59 ± 0.016
  A-logD[3]    0.69 ± 0.001    0.66 ± 0.007    0.65 ± 0.008        0.53 ± 0.007    0.5 ± 0.004     0.5 ± 0.005
  A-MS[1]      0.64 ± 0.001    0.63 ± 0.004    0.63 ± 0.004        0.61 ± 0.018      0.6 ± 0.02    0.6 ± 0.028
  A-MS[2]      0.69 ± 0.002    0.66 ± 0.007    0.66 ± 0.006        0.68 ± 0.011   0.65 ± 0.015    0.65 ± 0.008
  A-MS[3]      0.64 ± 0.001    0.61 ± 0.004    0.61 ± 0.003        0.64 ± 0.014   0.64 ± 0.006     0.6 ± 0.005




                                                              23
     Assay            MLPE          MLPE-P        MLPE-VA          MLPMC        MLPMC-P        MLPMC-VA              BNN           BNN-P         BNN-VA
     TB-1[1]      0.7 ± 0.008   0.63 ± 0.021    0.56 ± 0.009    0.69 ± 0.014    0.65 ± 0.05    0.61 ± 0.065    0.7 ± 0.003    0.71 ± 0.001    0.78 ± 0.137
     TB-1[2]     0.44 ± 0.003   0.43 ± 0.001    0.44 ± 0.001    0.44 ± 0.013   0.43 ± 0.004    0.44 ± 0.004   0.74 ± 0.021    0.62 ± 0.004    0.62 ± 0.037
     TB-1[3]      0.67 ± 0.01    0.8 ± 0.004    0.77 ± 0.007    0.66 ± 0.023   0.79 ± 0.032    0.77 ± 0.038   0.69 ± 0.002    0.69 ± 0.001    0.75 ± 0.064
     TB-2[1]     0.64 ± 0.009   0.67 ± 0.006    0.64 ± 0.003    0.63 ± 0.011   0.65 ± 0.015    0.64 ± 0.007   0.69 ± 0.001       0.67 ± 0.0   0.72 ± 0.047
                                                                                                                                                             Table 7: Summary of the BCE (↓) scores for the uncertainty quantification models. BCE results for all three
     TB-2[2]     0.54 ± 0.003   0.53 ± 0.004    0.53 ± 0.003    0.59 ± 0.053   0.53 ± 0.007    0.54 ± 0.009   0.68 ± 0.006    0.63 ± 0.002     0.7 ± 0.101
     TB-2[3]     0.63 ± 0.005   0.66 ± 0.003     0.7 ± 0.005    0.64 ± 0.024   0.67 ± 0.011     0.7 ± 0.013    0.72 ± 0.02    0.81 ± 0.007    0.81 ± 0.007
     TB-3[1]      0.5 ± 0.006   0.56 ± 0.001    0.55 ± 0.002     0.5 ± 0.014   0.55 ± 0.005    0.56 ± 0.008   0.53 ± 0.004    0.54 ± 0.004    0.54 ± 0.023
     TB-3[2]     0.45 ± 0.004   0.45 ± 0.003    0.46 ± 0.002    0.46 ± 0.015   0.45 ± 0.006    0.46 ± 0.005   0.43 ± 0.006    0.38 ± 0.008    0.35 ± 0.005
     TB-3[3]     0.19 ± 0.002   0.21 ± 0.001    0.21 ± 0.001    0.27 ± 0.012    0.2 ± 0.004    0.21 ± 0.003   0.28 ± 0.009    0.21 ± 0.011    0.21 ± 0.001
     TB-4[1]      0.3 ± 0.005    0.3 ± 0.002     0.3 ± 0.002    0.37 ± 0.013   0.31 ± 0.012    0.31 ± 0.009      0.4 ± 0.01   0.37 ± 0.006    0.32 ± 0.003
     TB-4[2]     0.45 ± 0.004   0.45 ± 0.005    0.46 ± 0.004    0.42 ± 0.018   0.44 ± 0.027    0.46 ± 0.018   0.43 ± 0.005    0.45 ± 0.006    0.52 ± 0.014
     TB-4[3]      0.25 ± 0.01   0.22 ± 0.004    0.22 ± 0.001    0.35 ± 0.058   0.23 ± 0.017    0.23 ± 0.013   0.33 ± 0.008    0.28 ± 0.003    0.22 ± 0.003
                                                                                                                                                             temporal settings of all TB and ADME-T assays are reported. The temporal setting is indicated in brackets after the

     TB-5[1]     0.52 ± 0.006   0.39 ± 0.001    0.37 ± 0.001     0.5 ± 0.036   0.39 ± 0.004    0.37 ± 0.003   0.46 ± 0.008    0.42 ± 0.002    0.43 ± 0.001
     TB-5[2]      0.57 ± 0.03   0.53 ± 0.003    0.52 ± 0.005    0.46 ± 0.022    0.52 ± 0.02    0.52 ± 0.022   0.49 ± 0.017    0.47 ± 0.012     0.51 ± 0.02
     TB-5[3]      0.3 ± 0.002   0.28 ± 0.001    0.29 ± 0.001    0.31 ± 0.007   0.28 ± 0.008    0.29 ± 0.006   0.38 ± 0.032    0.38 ± 0.024    0.35 ± 0.037
     TB-6[1]     0.54 ± 0.003   0.65 ± 0.006    0.66 ± 0.006    0.56 ± 0.008   0.65 ± 0.008    0.66 ± 0.008   0.58 ± 0.007    0.58 ± 0.002    0.58 ± 0.029
     TB-6[2]     0.45 ± 0.004   0.44 ± 0.004    0.45 ± 0.005    0.49 ± 0.025   0.44 ± 0.021    0.43 ± 0.027    0.45 ± 0.01    0.41 ± 0.014    0.39 ± 0.003
     TB-6[3]     0.29 ± 0.001      0.28 ± 0.0   0.29 ± 0.001     0.3 ± 0.006   0.28 ± 0.004    0.29 ± 0.003    0.37 ± 0.01     0.3 ± 0.002    0.31 ± 0.003
     TB-7[1]      0.66 ± 0.02   0.61 ± 0.026    0.58 ± 0.004    0.72 ± 0.032   0.72 ± 0.134    0.72 ± 0.125      0.69 ± 0.0   0.82 ± 0.001    0.83 ± 0.098
                                                                                                                                                             assay abbreviation. Results for the uncalibrated uncertainty quantification models (deep ensembles (MLPE), MC
     TB-7[2]     0.46 ± 0.007   0.46 ± 0.005    0.42 ± 0.002    0.52 ± 0.027   0.47 ± 0.016    0.44 ± 0.012    0.6 ± 0.029    0.55 ± 0.019    0.46 ± 0.008
     TB-7[3]      0.3 ± 0.009   0.27 ± 0.002    0.27 ± 0.002    0.37 ± 0.048   0.27 ± 0.009    0.27 ± 0.008   0.69 ± 0.002    0.33 ± 0.002    0.36 ± 0.076
     A-CYPa[1]   0.54 ± 0.003   0.55 ± 0.004    0.56 ± 0.008    0.56 ± 0.012    0.55 ± 0.01    0.56 ± 0.016      0.6 ± 0.01   0.56 ± 0.002    0.57 ± 0.025
     A-CYPa[2]   0.48 ± 0.004   0.52 ± 0.023    0.58 ± 0.032     0.49 ± 0.01   0.48 ± 0.003     0.5 ± 0.004   0.47 ± 0.002    0.48 ± 0.002     0.5 ± 0.004
24   A-CYPa[3]   0.52 ± 0.004   0.53 ± 0.001    0.52 ± 0.001    0.52 ± 0.012   0.52 ± 0.004    0.53 ± 0.004   0.52 ± 0.004    0.53 ± 0.006    0.53 ± 0.006
     A-CYPb[1]   0.49 ± 0.002      0.49 ± 0.0   0.49 ± 0.001    0.51 ± 0.008    0.5 ± 0.002     0.5 ± 0.003   0.51 ± 0.002    0.52 ± 0.001    0.51 ± 0.003
     A-CYPb[2]   0.48 ± 0.003   0.51 ± 0.002    0.51 ± 0.003    0.48 ± 0.015    0.52 ± 0.02    0.52 ± 0.025      0.46 ± 0.0   0.47 ± 0.003    0.49 ± 0.002
                                                                                                                                                             dropout (MLPMC), and Bayesian neural network (BNN)), their Platt-scaled counterparts (MLPE-P, MLPMC-P and
     A-CYPb[3]   0.38 ± 0.001      0.39 ± 0.0     0.39 ± 0.0    0.42 ± 0.018   0.39 ± 0.001    0.39 ± 0.002   0.39 ± 0.005    0.39 ± 0.002    0.38 ± 0.001
     A-CYPc[1]   0.59 ± 0.001   0.58 ± 0.001    0.58 ± 0.001    0.58 ± 0.006   0.58 ± 0.003    0.58 ± 0.002   0.63 ± 0.002       0.59 ± 0.0   0.59 ± 0.002
     A-CYPc[2]    0.6 ± 0.007    0.6 ± 0.004    0.58 ± 0.002     0.59 ± 0.01   0.62 ± 0.013     0.6 ± 0.017   0.62 ± 0.029    0.63 ± 0.032     0.62 ± 0.04
     A-CYPc[3]   0.55 ± 0.001      0.56 ± 0.0   0.56 ± 0.001    0.55 ± 0.002   0.56 ± 0.002    0.56 ± 0.002   0.54 ± 0.004    0.55 ± 0.004    0.55 ± 0.003
     A-PM[1]     0.38 ± 0.001      0.38 ± 0.0   0.38 ± 0.001    0.38 ± 0.003   0.37 ± 0.002    0.38 ± 0.002   0.42 ± 0.003    0.42 ± 0.002    0.37 ± 0.002
     A-PM[2]     0.28 ± 0.001   0.29 ± 0.001    0.29 ± 0.001    0.36 ± 0.018   0.29 ± 0.006     0.3 ± 0.005    0.3 ± 0.007    0.31 ± 0.012    0.29 ± 0.001
     A-PM[3]     0.27 ± 0.001      0.27 ± 0.0   0.27 ± 0.001    0.28 ± 0.006   0.27 ± 0.002    0.27 ± 0.002   0.29 ± 0.004    0.28 ± 0.003    0.26 ± 0.008
     A-SOL[1]     0.6 ± 0.001   0.59 ± 0.001    0.59 ± 0.001    0.59 ± 0.002   0.59 ± 0.004    0.59 ± 0.004   0.62 ± 0.039     0.6 ± 0.012    0.59 ± 0.013
                                                                                                                                                             BNN-P) and the models calibrated with Venn-ABERS (VA) predictors (MLPE-VA, MLPMC-VA and BNN-VA) are
     A-SOL[2]    0.56 ± 0.004   0.54 ± 0.005    0.54 ± 0.004     0.6 ± 0.013   0.59 ± 0.025    0.58 ± 0.023   0.69 ± 0.001    0.69 ± 0.001    0.72 ± 0.049
     A-SOL[3]    0.55 ± 0.004   0.55 ± 0.003    0.55 ± 0.003    0.57 ± 0.022   0.58 ± 0.022    0.56 ± 0.015   0.69 ± 0.001     0.7 ± 0.003    0.72 ± 0.068
     A-hERG[1]   0.52 ± 0.003   0.51 ± 0.001    0.51 ± 0.001    0.55 ± 0.022   0.52 ± 0.005    0.51 ± 0.005   0.63 ± 0.002       0.58 ± 0.0   0.57 ± 0.001
     A-hERG[2]    0.5 ± 0.001   0.49 ± 0.001        0.5 ± 0.0   0.51 ± 0.004   0.49 ± 0.002     0.5 ± 0.001   0.56 ± 0.017    0.54 ± 0.017    0.53 ± 0.014
     A-hERG[3]   0.47 ± 0.001   0.48 ± 0.001    0.47 ± 0.001     0.49 ± 0.01   0.48 ± 0.005    0.48 ± 0.004   0.51 ± 0.006     0.5 ± 0.004     0.5 ± 0.002
     A-logD[1]   0.58 ± 0.001   0.56 ± 0.001    0.57 ± 0.001    0.56 ± 0.003   0.56 ± 0.003    0.57 ± 0.003   0.61 ± 0.006     0.6 ± 0.004     0.6 ± 0.004
     A-logD[2]    0.6 ± 0.012    0.6 ± 0.009    0.57 ± 0.003    0.61 ± 0.022    0.6 ± 0.019    0.59 ± 0.009   0.68 ± 0.005    0.66 ± 0.008     0.66 ± 0.01
     A-logD[3]   0.52 ± 0.001   0.49 ± 0.003    0.49 ± 0.002    0.51 ± 0.005    0.5 ± 0.004     0.5 ± 0.004   0.51 ± 0.006    0.52 ± 0.004     0.5 ± 0.005
                                                                                                                                                             reported. The models were trained with compounds from three time spans. Averages over 10 model repetitions are

     A-MS[1]      0.6 ± 0.002   0.59 ± 0.001    0.59 ± 0.001     0.6 ± 0.018      0.6 ± 0.02    0.6 ± 0.028   0.61 ± 0.008    0.61 ± 0.004     0.6 ± 0.005
     A-MS[2]     0.67 ± 0.003   0.64 ± 0.002    0.64 ± 0.003    0.67 ± 0.009   0.65 ± 0.015    0.65 ± 0.015   0.66 ± 0.013    0.64 ± 0.007    0.64 ± 0.006
     A-MS[3]      0.62 ± 0.01   0.63 ± 0.008    0.61 ± 0.006     0.61 ± 0.01   0.61 ± 0.008     0.6 ± 0.005   0.58 ± 0.009    0.58 ± 0.007    0.58 ± 0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




                                                                                                                                                             shown.
 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




Table 8: Summary of the ACE (↓) scores for the baseline models. ACE results for all three temporal settings of
all TB and ADME-T assays are reported. The temporal setting is indicated in brackets after the assay abbreviation.
Results for the baselines (Random Forests (RF) and a multilayer perceptron (MLP)), Platt scaled models (RF-P and
MLP-P) and models calibrated with Venn-ABERS (VA) predictors (RF-VA and MLP-VA) are reported. The models
were trained with compounds from three time spans. Averages over 10 model repetitions are shown.
  Assay                  RF            RF-P          RF-VA                MLP          MLP-P        MLP-VA
  TB-1[1]      0.26 ± 0.011    0.16 ± 0.027    0.14 ± 0.018        0.23 ± 0.055   0.18 ± 0.039   0.12 ± 0.019
  TB-1[2]      0.27 ± 0.006    0.13 ± 0.011    0.13 ± 0.009        0.09 ± 0.016   0.08 ± 0.003   0.09 ± 0.008
  TB-1[3]      0.14 ± 0.018    0.21 ± 0.023    0.21 ± 0.006        0.16 ± 0.034   0.18 ± 0.028    0.19 ± 0.02
  TB-2[1]       0.09 ± 0.01    0.06 ± 0.014    0.09 ± 0.018         0.1 ± 0.016    0.11 ± 0.02   0.09 ± 0.008
  TB-2[2]      0.11 ± 0.011    0.06 ± 0.008    0.07 ± 0.019        0.14 ± 0.067    0.1 ± 0.012   0.09 ± 0.014
  TB-2[3]      0.23 ± 0.007    0.28 ± 0.011    0.27 ± 0.012        0.16 ± 0.025    0.2 ± 0.004   0.23 ± 0.006
  TB-3[1]      0.08 ± 0.014    0.23 ± 0.015     0.26 ± 0.01        0.08 ± 0.016   0.18 ± 0.005   0.17 ± 0.006
  TB-3[2]       0.2 ± 0.016    0.12 ± 0.014    0.11 ± 0.007        0.16 ± 0.018   0.15 ± 0.005    0.2 ± 0.061
  TB-3[3]      0.21 ± 0.009     0.07 ± 0.01     0.07 ± 0.01        0.06 ± 0.008   0.08 ± 0.007   0.09 ± 0.003
  TB-4[1]      0.24 ± 0.033    0.08 ± 0.018    0.08 ± 0.024        0.05 ± 0.016   0.05 ± 0.018   0.04 ± 0.007
  TB-4[2]      0.21 ± 0.026    0.09 ± 0.014    0.11 ± 0.015        0.11 ± 0.008    0.1 ± 0.012    0.1 ± 0.009
  TB-4[3]      0.25 ± 0.018    0.09 ± 0.015    0.06 ± 0.017        0.09 ± 0.066    0.07 ± 0.02   0.07 ± 0.032
  TB-5[1]      0.06 ± 0.009    0.16 ± 0.018    0.16 ± 0.025        0.09 ± 0.001   0.07 ± 0.001   0.07 ± 0.001
  TB-5[2]      0.07 ± 0.006    0.07 ± 0.013    0.08 ± 0.012        0.15 ± 0.012   0.12 ± 0.005   0.12 ± 0.005
  TB-5[3]       0.07 ± 0.01    0.06 ± 0.012    0.05 ± 0.009        0.05 ± 0.005   0.02 ± 0.003   0.03 ± 0.003
  TB-6[1]      0.08 ± 0.013    0.21 ± 0.019    0.23 ± 0.024        0.09 ± 0.011   0.23 ± 0.007   0.23 ± 0.006
  TB-6[2]      0.23 ± 0.008    0.15 ± 0.008    0.15 ± 0.019        0.17 ± 0.035   0.15 ± 0.013   0.19 ± 0.047
  TB-6[3]       0.2 ± 0.005     0.04 ± 0.01    0.04 ± 0.009        0.06 ± 0.013   0.04 ± 0.004   0.05 ± 0.004
  TB-7[1]      0.22 ± 0.006    0.16 ± 0.029    0.11 ± 0.035        0.16 ± 0.074   0.16 ± 0.107   0.17 ± 0.098
  TB-7[2]      0.21 ± 0.014    0.18 ± 0.016     0.09 ± 0.03        0.13 ± 0.045   0.12 ± 0.027    0.08 ± 0.02
  TB-7[3]      0.31 ± 0.009    0.11 ± 0.013    0.12 ± 0.026        0.11 ± 0.078   0.07 ± 0.012   0.07 ± 0.013
  A-CYPa[1]    0.09 ± 0.003    0.11 ± 0.011     0.09 ± 0.01        0.09 ± 0.014    0.1 ± 0.005   0.11 ± 0.027
  A-CYPa[2]    0.04 ± 0.013    0.06 ± 0.017     0.1 ± 0.029         0.06 ± 0.01   0.08 ± 0.004   0.08 ± 0.008
  A-CYPa[3]    0.08 ± 0.004    0.07 ± 0.009    0.06 ± 0.006        0.06 ± 0.012   0.07 ± 0.004   0.06 ± 0.005
  A-CYPb[1]    0.08 ± 0.005    0.07 ± 0.004    0.06 ± 0.006        0.06 ± 0.012   0.07 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.004
  A-CYPb[2]    0.04 ± 0.007    0.12 ± 0.011    0.14 ± 0.009        0.08 ± 0.016   0.11 ± 0.008    0.11 ± 0.01
  A-CYPb[3]    0.05 ± 0.005    0.05 ± 0.006    0.05 ± 0.006        0.05 ± 0.017   0.05 ± 0.003   0.05 ± 0.004
  A-CYPc[1]    0.12 ± 0.003    0.06 ± 0.013    0.07 ± 0.015        0.08 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.001
  A-CYPc[2]    0.11 ± 0.012     0.1 ± 0.008    0.08 ± 0.007        0.12 ± 0.021    0.1 ± 0.005   0.09 ± 0.006
  A-CYPc[3]    0.07 ± 0.013    0.13 ± 0.011    0.13 ± 0.012        0.05 ± 0.012   0.09 ± 0.002   0.09 ± 0.002
  A-PM[1]      0.05 ± 0.003    0.04 ± 0.004    0.05 ± 0.003        0.02 ± 0.005   0.02 ± 0.001   0.02 ± 0.003
  A-PM[2]       0.1 ± 0.003    0.06 ± 0.005    0.07 ± 0.006        0.04 ± 0.007   0.07 ± 0.007   0.08 ± 0.024
  A-PM[3]      0.09 ± 0.001    0.02 ± 0.005    0.03 ± 0.008         0.04 ± 0.01   0.03 ± 0.002   0.03 ± 0.002
  A-SOL[1]      0.1 ± 0.009    0.05 ± 0.009    0.03 ± 0.005        0.06 ± 0.004   0.03 ± 0.003   0.02 ± 0.003
  A-SOL[2]     0.13 ± 0.006    0.04 ± 0.007    0.04 ± 0.007        0.09 ± 0.021   0.09 ± 0.027   0.04 ± 0.007
  A-SOL[3]     0.13 ± 0.008    0.07 ± 0.005    0.07 ± 0.006        0.08 ± 0.019   0.06 ± 0.023   0.04 ± 0.005
  A-hERG[1]    0.17 ± 0.005    0.04 ± 0.004    0.05 ± 0.006        0.09 ± 0.031   0.03 ± 0.007   0.02 ± 0.003
  A-hERG[2]    0.11 ± 0.004    0.04 ± 0.008     0.04 ± 0.01        0.05 ± 0.004   0.03 ± 0.009   0.02 ± 0.003
  A-hERG[3]     0.1 ± 0.001    0.03 ± 0.003    0.05 ± 0.006         0.07 ± 0.01   0.06 ± 0.007   0.05 ± 0.007
  A-logD[1]    0.08 ± 0.013    0.03 ± 0.008    0.03 ± 0.008        0.08 ± 0.008   0.05 ± 0.002   0.04 ± 0.002
  A-logD[2]    0.09 ± 0.007    0.05 ± 0.006    0.05 ± 0.007         0.1 ± 0.021    0.08 ± 0.02   0.06 ± 0.016
  A-logD[3]    0.12 ± 0.012     0.08 ± 0.01    0.05 ± 0.005        0.07 ± 0.007   0.03 ± 0.003   0.03 ± 0.003
  A-MS[1]      0.07 ± 0.011    0.03 ± 0.006    0.03 ± 0.009        0.08 ± 0.022   0.04 ± 0.006    0.05 ± 0.02
  A-MS[2]      0.11 ± 0.007    0.05 ± 0.009    0.04 ± 0.004        0.12 ± 0.017   0.06 ± 0.017   0.06 ± 0.007
  A-MS[3]      0.11 ± 0.006    0.06 ± 0.006    0.04 ± 0.003         0.08 ± 0.01   0.08 ± 0.009   0.05 ± 0.005




                                                              25
     Assay             MLPE         MLPE-P        MLPE-VA         MLPMC        MLPMC-P        MLPMC-VA              BNN           BNN-P        BNN-VA
     TB-1[1]     0.28 ± 0.006    0.21 ± 0.021   0.13 ± 0.015   0.22 ± 0.055   0.17 ± 0.039    0.13 ± 0.022   0.09 ± 0.007    0.11 ± 0.004   0.18 ± 0.105
     TB-1[2]      0.1 ± 0.004    0.08 ± 0.001   0.09 ± 0.005    0.1 ± 0.019   0.08 ± 0.003    0.09 ± 0.008   0.31 ± 0.021    0.21 ± 0.014    0.2 ± 0.031
     TB-1[3]     0.13 ± 0.013    0.21 ± 0.002   0.18 ± 0.004    0.1 ± 0.022    0.2 ± 0.019    0.19 ± 0.018   0.15 ± 0.003    0.12 ± 0.002   0.21 ± 0.034
     TB-2[1]     0.09 ± 0.008     0.1 ± 0.004   0.09 ± 0.004   0.08 ± 0.012      0.1 ± 0.01    0.08 ± 0.01   0.11 ± 0.003    0.04 ± 0.011    0.17 ± 0.05
                                                                                                                                                           Table 9: Summary of the ACE (↓) scores for the uncertainty quantification models. ACE results for all three
     TB-2[2]     0.11 ± 0.006    0.09 ± 0.006   0.08 ± 0.006   0.18 ± 0.051   0.09 ± 0.007     0.08 ± 0.01   0.18 ± 0.009    0.09 ± 0.004    0.2 ± 0.101
     TB-2[3]     0.17 ± 0.005     0.2 ± 0.001   0.23 ± 0.002   0.18 ± 0.023   0.21 ± 0.004    0.23 ± 0.005    0.2 ± 0.022    0.28 ± 0.007   0.24 ± 0.007
     TB-3[1]     0.09 ± 0.009    0.18 ± 0.004   0.17 ± 0.002    0.1 ± 0.022   0.17 ± 0.007    0.17 ± 0.007   0.08 ± 0.012     0.1 ± 0.007    0.09 ± 0.04
     TB-3[2]     0.15 ± 0.005    0.15 ± 0.002   0.16 ± 0.002   0.18 ± 0.016   0.15 ± 0.006    0.16 ± 0.008   0.19 ± 0.006    0.14 ± 0.013    0.1 ± 0.007
     TB-3[3]     0.06 ± 0.002    0.08 ± 0.001   0.09 ± 0.001   0.16 ± 0.011   0.07 ± 0.004    0.08 ± 0.003   0.16 ± 0.009    0.09 ± 0.012   0.09 ± 0.002
     TB-4[1]     0.04 ± 0.007    0.03 ± 0.003   0.04 ± 0.003   0.11 ± 0.012   0.03 ± 0.012    0.04 ± 0.006   0.16 ± 0.009    0.12 ± 0.005   0.07 ± 0.003
     TB-4[2]      0.1 ± 0.003     0.1 ± 0.002    0.1 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.006   0.09 ± 0.015    0.11 ± 0.011   0.06 ± 0.005    0.09 ± 0.012   0.14 ± 0.006
     TB-4[3]     0.08 ± 0.012    0.05 ± 0.004   0.05 ± 0.003   0.18 ± 0.044   0.06 ± 0.009    0.05 ± 0.005   0.15 ± 0.007     0.1 ± 0.005   0.05 ± 0.003
                                                                                                                                                           temporal settings of all TB and ADME-T assays are reported. The temporal setting is indicated in brackets after the

     TB-5[1]        0.09 ± 0.0     0.07 ± 0.0     0.07 ± 0.0   0.09 ± 0.002   0.07 ± 0.001    0.07 ± 0.002   0.18 ± 0.009    0.13 ± 0.004   0.13 ± 0.004
     TB-5[2]     0.14 ± 0.009    0.12 ± 0.001   0.12 ± 0.002   0.08 ± 0.024   0.12 ± 0.006    0.12 ± 0.005    0.1 ± 0.016    0.08 ± 0.007    0.1 ± 0.014
     TB-5[3]     0.05 ± 0.002    0.02 ± 0.001   0.03 ± 0.002   0.05 ± 0.005   0.02 ± 0.002    0.03 ± 0.003   0.08 ± 0.015    0.09 ± 0.011   0.03 ± 0.016
     TB-6[1]      0.1 ± 0.005    0.23 ± 0.004   0.24 ± 0.006   0.12 ± 0.015    0.22 ± 0.01    0.23 ± 0.009   0.09 ± 0.018    0.09 ± 0.006   0.08 ± 0.053
     TB-6[2]     0.16 ± 0.004    0.14 ± 0.003   0.15 ± 0.004    0.2 ± 0.023   0.14 ± 0.017    0.14 ± 0.024      0.2 ± 0.01   0.16 ± 0.017   0.11 ± 0.002
     TB-6[3]     0.05 ± 0.001    0.04 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.001   0.07 ± 0.012   0.04 ± 0.004    0.05 ± 0.003   0.15 ± 0.011    0.04 ± 0.005   0.06 ± 0.006
     TB-7[1]     0.19 ± 0.023     0.12 ± 0.03   0.05 ± 0.015    0.14 ± 0.08   0.16 ± 0.105     0.17 ± 0.09   0.03 ± 0.003    0.24 ± 0.001   0.25 ± 0.063
                                                                                                                                                           assay abbreviation. Results for the uncalibrated uncertainty quantification models (deep ensembles (MLPE), MC
     TB-7[2]     0.12 ± 0.008    0.12 ± 0.006   0.06 ± 0.006   0.18 ± 0.023   0.12 ± 0.013    0.07 ± 0.017   0.25 ± 0.024    0.21 ± 0.015   0.08 ± 0.011
     TB-7[3]      0.11 ± 0.01    0.07 ± 0.002   0.07 ± 0.004   0.18 ± 0.041   0.06 ± 0.009    0.06 ± 0.011   0.42 ± 0.001    0.11 ± 0.003   0.14 ± 0.067
     A-CYPa[1]   0.08 ± 0.003     0.1 ± 0.005    0.09 ± 0.01   0.11 ± 0.025    0.1 ± 0.009    0.09 ± 0.017   0.18 ± 0.013    0.11 ± 0.007   0.11 ± 0.023
     A-CYPa[2]   0.08 ± 0.011    0.12 ± 0.019    0.14 ± 0.02   0.09 ± 0.022   0.08 ± 0.006    0.08 ± 0.006    0.04 ± 0.01    0.07 ± 0.006   0.11 ± 0.006
26   A-CYPa[3]   0.05 ± 0.001    0.07 ± 0.002   0.07 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.025   0.06 ± 0.002    0.06 ± 0.004   0.04 ± 0.008    0.06 ± 0.009   0.06 ± 0.002
     A-CYPb[1]   0.06 ± 0.003    0.07 ± 0.001   0.07 ± 0.002   0.09 ± 0.019   0.06 ± 0.003    0.07 ± 0.003   0.05 ± 0.005    0.06 ± 0.004   0.05 ± 0.002
     A-CYPb[2]   0.06 ± 0.003    0.11 ± 0.002   0.11 ± 0.003   0.08 ± 0.021    0.11 ± 0.01    0.12 ± 0.012   0.04 ± 0.004     0.06 ± 0.01   0.09 ± 0.002
                                                                                                                                                           dropout (MLPMC), and Bayesian neural network (BNN)), their Platt-scaled counterparts (MLPE-P, MLPMC-P and
     A-CYPb[3]   0.04 ± 0.003    0.05 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.003   0.09 ± 0.032   0.05 ± 0.002    0.05 ± 0.004   0.05 ± 0.011    0.05 ± 0.006   0.04 ± 0.003
     A-CYPc[1]   0.08 ± 0.001    0.07 ± 0.001   0.07 ± 0.001   0.06 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.003    0.07 ± 0.001   0.17 ± 0.003     0.1 ± 0.004   0.07 ± 0.007
     A-CYPc[2]   0.12 ± 0.006    0.11 ± 0.003   0.09 ± 0.001   0.09 ± 0.016   0.11 ± 0.008    0.09 ± 0.005   0.07 ± 0.007    0.09 ± 0.005   0.08 ± 0.012
     A-CYPc[3]   0.05 ± 0.002    0.08 ± 0.001   0.09 ± 0.002   0.05 ± 0.008   0.08 ± 0.002    0.09 ± 0.003    0.06 ± 0.01     0.08 ± 0.01   0.08 ± 0.004
     A-PM[1]     0.02 ± 0.002    0.01 ± 0.001   0.02 ± 0.002   0.03 ± 0.006   0.01 ± 0.001    0.02 ± 0.002   0.13 ± 0.004    0.13 ± 0.004   0.06 ± 0.006
     A-PM[2]     0.05 ± 0.003    0.07 ± 0.001   0.07 ± 0.001    0.13 ± 0.02   0.06 ± 0.007    0.07 ± 0.007    0.07 ± 0.01    0.08 ± 0.015   0.07 ± 0.001
     A-PM[3]     0.04 ± 0.002    0.03 ± 0.001   0.03 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.009   0.03 ± 0.002    0.03 ± 0.002   0.07 ± 0.007    0.04 ± 0.005   0.02 ± 0.003
     A-SOL[1]    0.05 ± 0.001    0.04 ± 0.001   0.02 ± 0.003   0.05 ± 0.004   0.04 ± 0.004    0.02 ± 0.004   0.09 ± 0.047    0.04 ± 0.008   0.02 ± 0.003
                                                                                                                                                           BNN-P) and the models calibrated with Venn-ABERS (VA) predictors (MLPE-VA, MLPMC-VA and BNN-VA) are
     A-SOL[2]    0.08 ± 0.007    0.04 ± 0.009   0.03 ± 0.004   0.09 ± 0.016   0.07 ± 0.012     0.04 ± 0.01   0.04 ± 0.005    0.03 ± 0.007   0.08 ± 0.068
     A-SOL[3]    0.04 ± 0.006    0.05 ± 0.003   0.03 ± 0.002   0.06 ± 0.018   0.07 ± 0.017    0.04 ± 0.004   0.05 ± 0.003     0.1 ± 0.008   0.11 ± 0.066
     A-hERG[1]   0.06 ± 0.009    0.03 ± 0.001   0.02 ± 0.002   0.11 ± 0.031   0.04 ± 0.006    0.02 ± 0.003   0.16 ± 0.003    0.05 ± 0.002   0.03 ± 0.006
     A-hERG[2]   0.04 ± 0.001    0.03 ± 0.003   0.02 ± 0.002   0.06 ± 0.008   0.03 ± 0.003    0.02 ± 0.003   0.08 ± 0.005    0.04 ± 0.013   0.02 ± 0.005
     A-hERG[3]   0.05 ± 0.003    0.06 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.001   0.09 ± 0.016   0.06 ± 0.005    0.05 ± 0.008   0.06 ± 0.014    0.03 ± 0.014   0.03 ± 0.002
     A-logD[1]   0.08 ± 0.001    0.05 ± 0.001   0.04 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.006   0.05 ± 0.002    0.04 ± 0.003   0.07 ± 0.002     0.05 ± 0.01   0.04 ± 0.003
     A-logD[2]   0.08 ± 0.011    0.08 ± 0.009   0.05 ± 0.002   0.08 ± 0.018   0.08 ± 0.016    0.06 ± 0.006    0.11 ± 0.01    0.08 ± 0.005   0.06 ± 0.003
     A-logD[3]   0.07 ± 0.002    0.03 ± 0.001   0.03 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.007   0.03 ± 0.003    0.03 ± 0.003   0.03 ± 0.011    0.06 ± 0.008   0.02 ± 0.003
                                                                                                                                                           reported. The models were trained with compounds from three time spans. Averages over 10 model repetitions are

     A-MS[1]     0.08 ± 0.005    0.04 ± 0.001   0.05 ± 0.002   0.07 ± 0.014   0.04 ± 0.007     0.05 ± 0.02   0.06 ± 0.011    0.07 ± 0.008   0.04 ± 0.003
     A-MS[2]     0.12 ± 0.003    0.05 ± 0.002   0.06 ± 0.002    0.1 ± 0.016   0.06 ± 0.007    0.06 ± 0.005   0.11 ± 0.016    0.06 ± 0.017   0.06 ± 0.001
     A-MS[3]     0.07 ± 0.006    0.08 ± 0.006   0.05 ± 0.002   0.06 ± 0.012   0.07 ± 0.009    0.05 ± 0.005   0.04 ± 0.013    0.04 ± 0.009   0.04 ± 0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Temporal Distribution Shift in Real-World Pharmaceutical Data: Implications for Uncertainty Quantification in QSAR Models




                                                                                                                                                           shown.
