                                         Uncertainty quantification of molecular property
                                               prediction with Bayesian neural networks




arXiv:1903.08375v1 [cs.LG] 20 Mar 2019
                                                     Seongok Ryu,† Yongchan Kwon,‡ and Woo Youn Kim∗,†,¶

                                         †Department of Chemistry, KAIST, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic
                                                                                      of Korea
                                           ‡Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
                                           ¶KI for Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141,
                                                                                Republic of Korea

                                                                           E-mail: wooyoun@kaist.ac.kr


                                                                                     Abstract

                                                Deep neural networks have outperformed existing machine learning models in var-

                                             ious molecular applications. In practical applications, it is still difficult to make confi-

                                             dent decisions because of the uncertainty in predictions arisen from insufficient quality

                                             and quantity of training data. Here, we show that Bayesian neural networks are use-

                                             ful to quantify the uncertainty of molecular property prediction with three numerical

                                             experiments. In particular, it enables us to decompose the predictive variance into the

                                             model- and data-driven uncertainties, which helps to elucidate the source of errors. In

                                             the logP predictions, we show that data noise affected the data-driven uncertainties

                                             more significantly than the model-driven ones. Based on this analysis, we were able

                                             to find unexpected errors in the Harvard Clean Energy Project dataset. Lastly, we

                                             show that the confidence of prediction is closely related to the predictive uncertainty

                                             by performing on bio-activity and toxicity classification problems.


                                                                                          1
Introduction

Modern deep neural network (DNN) models have been used in various molecular applica-
tions, such as high-throughput screening for drug discovery, 1–4 de novo molecular design 5–12
and planning chemical reaction. 13–15 DNNs show comparable or sometimes better perfor-
mance than traditional approaches grounded on quantum chemical theories in predicting
some molecular properties, 16–20 if a vast amount of well-qualified data is secured. Despite
the remarkable potential of DNN models, the direct use of their outputs is sometimes limited
because most data in practical applications is likely to involve undesirable problems caused
by the lack of both data quality and quantity.
   Such data discourages a reliable statistical analysis based on DNN models, since their
accuracy critically depends on training data. For example, Feinberg et al. mentioned that
more qualified data should be provided to improve the prediction accuracy on drug-target
interactions, which is a key step for drug discovery. 21 The number of ligand-protein complex
samples in the PDB-bind database 22 is only about 15,000, limiting the development of reli-
able DNN models. In order to prepare more qualified data, expensive and time-consuming
experiments are inevitable. Synthetic data from computations can be used as an alternative,
like the Harvard Clean Energy Project set, 23 but it often suffers from unintentional errors
caused by approximation methods employed. In addition, data-inherent bias and noise hurt
the quality of data. Tox21 3 and DUD-E dataset 24 are such examples. The number of data
in the Tox21 dataset is less than 10,000. There are far more negative samples than positive
samples. Of various toxic types, the lowest percentage of positive samples is 2.9% and the
highest is 15.5%. For the DUD-E dataset, it is highly imbalanced that the number of decoy
samples are almost 50 times larger than that of active samples. All of those situations would
interrupt developing reliable models.
   It has been stressed in deep learning researches that uncertainty analysis is necessary to
address namely the AI-safety problems. 25–27 That is because even though DNNs push the
bounds of data-driven approaches, they often make catastrophic decisions. The uncertainty

                                              2
analysis has been performed to analyze the processes of decision making with deep neural
networks. Kendall and Gal studied quantitative uncertainty analysis on computer vision
problems by using Bayesian neural networks (BNNs). 28 They separated model- and data-
driven uncertainties, which helps to identify the sources of prediction errors. It is possible
because Bayesian inference allows uncertainty assessments, giving probabilistic interpreta-
tions of model outputs.
   In this paper, we propose to exploit BNNs to quantify uncertainties implied in molecular
property predictions. Previous studies on uncertainty quantification have regarded a predic-
tive variance as a predictive uncertainty. 28,29 The predictive uncertainty can be decomposed
into (i) an aleatoric uncertainty arisen from data noise and (ii) an epistemic uncertainty
arisen from the incompleteness of model. 30 We adopt the same method in this study. As
a DNN model for molecular applications, we use augmented graph convolutional networks
(GCNs). 31–33 In what follows, we briefly introduce BNNs, the uncertainty quantification
methods based on Bayesian inference, and the augmented-GCN used in this work. Then, we
show the results of uncertainty analysis on three experimental studies. The main results are
summarized as follows.

   • We first applied the Bayesian GCN to a simple example, the logP prediction of molecules
     in the ZINC set, 34 in order to demonstrate the uncertainty quantification in molecu-
     lar applications. As expected, the aleatoric uncertainty increases as the data noise
     increases, while the epistemic uncertainty slightly depends on the quality of data.

   • Second, we evaluate the quality of synthetic data and find erroneous samples fabricated
     by poor approximations. The Harvard Clean Energy Project (CEP) set 23 contains syn-
     thetic power conversion efficiency (PCE) values of molecules. We noted that molecules
     with exactly zero values have a conspicuously large aleatoric uncertainty, which have
     been verified as incorrect annotations.

   • In the last example, for the binary classification of bio-activity and toxicity, we studied


                                               3
       the relationship between predicted probability and uncertainties. Our analysis shows
       that prediction with a lower uncertainty turned out to be more accurate, indicating
       that the uncertainty can be regarded as the confidence of prediction.



Theoretical backgrounds

Bayesian neural network

For a given training set {X, Y}, let p(Y|X, w) and p(w) be a model likelihood and a prior
distribution for a parameter w ∈ Ω, respectively. Under the Bayesian framework, the model
parameter and output are considered as random variables. The posterior distribution is given
by
                                                  p(Y|X, w)p(w)
                                    p(w|X, Y) =                                           (1)
                                                     p(Y|X)

and the predictive distribution is defined as

                                            Z
                            ∗   ∗
                        p(y |x , X, Y) =         p(y∗ |x∗ , w)p(w|X, Y)dw                 (2)
                                             Ω



for a new input x∗ and an output y∗ . These simple formulations make the two following tasks
possible: (i) assessing uncertainty of the random variables in a conditional manner and (ii)
predicting a distribution of the new output y∗ given both the new input x∗ and the training
set {X, Y}.
     However, direct computation of eq. (2) is often infeasible when deep neural network mod-
els are exploited because the integration over the whole parameter space Ω entails heavy com-
putational costs. Many practical approximation methods have been proposed to handle this
computation cost. A variational inference, one of the most popular approximation methods,
approximates the posterior distribution with a tractable distribution qθ (w) parametrized by




                                                  4
a variational parameter θ. 35,36 Minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence,

                                                     Z
                                                                         qθ (w)
                    KL(qθ (w)kp(w|X, Y)) =                qθ (w) log             dw,       (3)
                                                      Ω                p(w|X, Y)

makes the two distributions similar to one another in principle. We can replace the intractable
posterior distribution in (3) with p(Y|X, w)p(w) due to the Bayes’ theorem (1). Then, our
minimization objective, called the negative evidence lower-bound, is

                               Z
                 LVI (θ) = −       qθ (w) log p(Y|X, w)dw + KL(qθ (w)kp(w)).               (4)
                               Ω



   In order to implement Bayesian models, we need to be cautious in choosing a varia-
tional distribution qθ (w). Blundell et al. proposed to use a product of Gaussian distributions
for the variational distribution qθ (w). In addition, a multiplicative normalizing flow 37 can
be applied to increase the expressive power of variational distribution. However, the two
approaches often require a large number of weight parameters. The Monte-Carlo dropout
(MC-dropout) using a dropout 38 variational distribution approximates the posterior distri-
bution by a product of Bernoulli distribution. 39 The MC-dropout is practical in that it does
not need extra learnable parameters to model the variational posterior distribution and the
integration over the whole parameter space can be easily approximated with the summation
of models sampled by a Monte-Carlo estimator. 25,39 Thus, we adopted the MC-dropout in
this work.


Uncertainty quantification with Bayesian neural network

A variational inference approximating a posterior with a variational distribution qθ (w) pro-
vides a variational predictive distribution of a new output y∗ given a new input x∗ as

                                              Z
                            qθ∗ (y∗ |x∗ ) =       qθ (w)p(y∗ |f w (x∗ ))dw,                (5)
                                              Ω




                                                     5
where f w (x∗ ) is a model output with a given w. For regression tasks, a predictive mean of
this distribution with T times of MC sampling is estimated by

                                                      T
                                     ∗   ∗   1 X ŵt ∗
                                 Ê[y |x ] =       f (x ),                                (6)
                                             T t=1

and a predictive variance is estimated by

                                    T
                   ∗ ∗           1 X ŵt ∗ T ŵt ∗
                            2
             V ar[y |x ] = σ I +
             d                         f (x ) f (x ) − Ê[y∗ |x∗ ]T Ê[y∗ |x∗ ],          (7)
                                 T t=1


with ŵt drawn from qθ (w) at the sampling step t and an assumption p(y∗ |f w (x∗ )) =
N (y∗ ; f w (x∗ ), σ 2 I). Here, the model assumes a homoscedasticity with a known quantity,
meaning that every data point gives a distribution with a same variance σ 2 . Further to
this, obtaining the distributions with different variances allows deducing a heteroscedastic
uncertainty. Assuming the heteroscedasticity, the output given the t-th sample ŵt is


                                     [ŷ∗t , σ̂t ] = f ŵt (x∗ ).                         (8)


The heteroscedastic predictive uncertainty given by (9) can be partitioned into two different
uncertainties: aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties.

                                     T              T           T
                          ∗ ∗     1X ∗ 2         1X ∗ 2 1X 2
                    V ar[y |x ] =
                    d                  (ŷ ) − (      ŷ ) +      σ̂ .                    (9)
                                  T t=1 t        T t=1 t     T t=1 t
                                  |          {z           } | {z }
                                              epistemic             aleatoric


The aleatoric uncertainty arises from data inherent noise, while the epistemic uncertainty is
related to the model incompleteness. Note that the latter can be reduced by increasing the
amount of training data, because it comes from insufficient amount of data as well as the
use of inappropriate model. 30
   In classification problems, Kwon et al. proposed a natural way to quantify aleatoric and



                                                  6
epistemic uncertainties as follows.

                              T                           T
                           1X ∗               ∗         1X
                   ∗ ∗
             V ar[y |x ] =
             d                                       T
                                 (ŷt − ȳ)(ŷt − ȳ) +      (diag(ŷ∗t ) − (ŷ∗t )(ŷ∗t )T ),   (10)
                           T                            T
                           | t=1       {z            } | t=1         {z                     }
                                       epistemic                         aleatoric


             PT      ∗          ∗            ŵt ∗
where ȳ =     t=1 ŷt /T and ŷt = softmax(f (x )). While Kendall and Gal’s method requires

extra parameters σ̂t at the last hidden layer and often causes unstable parameter updates in
a training phase, 28 the method in Kwon et al. has advantages in that models do not need the
extra parameters. 29 The equation (10) also utilizes a functional relationship between mean
and variance of multinomial random variables. We refer to Kwon et al. for more details.


Graph convolutional network for molecular property predictions

Molecules, social graphs, images and language sentences can be represented as graph struc-
tures. 40 GCN is one of the most popular graph neural networks and is widely adopted to
process molcular graphs. Inputs to the GCN is G = (A, X), where A ∈ RN ×N is an adja-
cency matrix with the number of nodes N and X = H(0) ∈ RN ×Finp is a set of initial node
features whose dimensionality is Finp . The GCN gives new node features as follows.


                                     H(l+1) = ReLU(AH(l) W(l) ),                                 (11)


where H(l) ∈ RN ×F and W(l) ∈ RF ×F are node features and weight parameters for the l-th
graph convolution layer for l ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1}, respectively. The GCN updates node features
H(l+1) with information of only adjacent nodes.
   Applying a self-attention 41 enables the GCN to learn relations between node pairs by
reflecting the importance of adjacent nodes. 42 Updating node features with the K-head




                                                    7
self-attention is given by

                 (l+1)                X       (l)     (l)      (l)
                                                                                        X        (l)   (l)   (l)      (l)
               H̃i       = [ReLU(           αij,1 Hj W1 ), ..., ReLU(                          αij,K Hj WK )]WO ,               (12)
                                     j∈Ni                                              j∈Ni


                                                                                         (l)
where Ni denotes the adjacent nodes of the i-th node, Hj ∈ R1×F is the j-th node feature
                                                      (l)
updated at l-th graph convolution, Wk ∈ RF ×F is a weight parameter for the k-th attention
         (l)
head, WO ∈ RKF ×F is a weight parameter to combine the node features from K-different
                                                                         (l)
attention heads, and the attention coefficient αij,k is given by


                                     (l)                     (l)     (l)       (l)     (l)     (l)
                                    αij,k = tanh((Hi Wk )Ck (Hj Wk )T ),                                                        (13)


         (l)
where Ck ∈ RF ×F is a weight parameter.
   In addition, the GCN has room for improvement because its accuracy is gradually lowered
as the number of graph convolution layers increases. 32,33 We used a gated-skip connection
to prevent this problem as follows.

                          (l+1)                                                                               (l+1)
    H(l+1) = r       H̃           + (1 − r)         H(l) ,     r = sigmoid(Ur,1 H(l) + Ur,2 H̃                        + br ),   (14)


where Ur,1 and Ur,2 are trainable parameters and                                     denotes Hadamard product.
   After computing the node features L-times by following eq. (14), a graph feature zG ∈ RdG
is aggregated as the summation of all node features in a set of nodes V,

                                                            X
                                                zG =               MLP1 (H(L)
                                                                          v ),                                                  (15)
                                                            v∈V


where MLP denotes a multi-layer perceptron. The graph feature is invariant to permutations
of the node states. A molecular property, which is the final output from the model, is a
function of the graph feature.
                                                    ypred = MLP2 (zG ).                                                         (16)


                                                                     8
Implementation details

Model architecture




Figure 1: The architecture of Bayesian GCN used in this work. (a) The entire model is
composed of three augemented graph convolutional layers, readout layers and three linear
layers with non-linear activation. (b) Detailed description of the graph convolution layer
augmented with attention and gate mechanisms. We added dropout layers in order for the
model parameters to have stochasticity.


   As illustrated in Figure 1, our graph convolutional MC-dropout network used in this
work consists of the following three parts:

   • Three augmented graph convolution layers update node features according to (14).
     The number of self-attention head is four. The dimension of output from each layer is
     (N × F ) = (75 × 32).

   • A readout function produces a graph feature whose dimension dG is 256 by following
     (15).

   • A feed-forward MLP, which is composed of two fully-connected layers, turns out a
     molecular property. The hidden dimension of each fully-connected layer is 256.

                                              9
In order for the model parameters to have stochasticity, we applied dropouts at every hidden
layer. Note that we did not use the standard dropout with a pre-defined dropout rate, but
used Concrete dropout 43 to develop as an accurate Bayesian model as possible. By using
the Concrete dropout, we can obtain an optimal dropout rate for individual hidden layer by
a stochastic optimization. We used Gaussian priors N (0, l2 ) with length scale l = 10−4 for
all model parameters. In the training phase, we used the Adam optimizer 44 with an initial
learning rate 10−3 , and the learning rate is decayed by half at every 10 epoch. The number
of total training epoches is 100 and the batch size is 100. We randomly split datasets in the
ratio of (0.72 : 0.08 : 0.2) for training, validation and test. The code used for the experiments
is available at https://github.com/seongokryu/uq-molecule.



Experiments

Implication of data quality on aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties




Figure 2: Histograms of (a) aleatoric , (b) epistemic and (c) total uncertanties as the amount
of additive noise σ 2 increases.


   In this experiment, we applied the uncertainty quantification method to a simple example,
logP prediction. We chose this example because we can obtain the logP value of molecules
from the analytic expression of logP as implemented in the RDKit 45 without data inherent
noise. To examine the effect of data quality on uncertainties, we adjust the extent of noise
in logP by adding a random Gaussian noise  ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). We trained the model with 97,287


                                               10
samples and analyzed uncertainties of each predicted logP for 27,023 samples. The samples
were chosen randomly from the ZINC dataset.
   Figure 2 shows the distribution of the three uncertainties as a function of the amount of
additive noise σ 2 . As the noise level increases, the aleatoric and total uncertainties increase,
but the epistemic uncertainty is slightly changed. This result verifies that the aleatoric un-
certainty arises from data inherent noises, while the epistemic uncertainty does not depend
on data quality. Theoretically, the epistemic uncertainty should not increase by the changes
in the amount of data noise. We guess that the slight change of the epistemic uncertainty
arises from the stochastic numerical optimization of model parameters.


Evaluating quality of synthetic data based on uncertainty analysis




Figure 3: (a) Aleatoric, (b) epistemic, (c) total uncertainties and (d) predicted PCE against
the PCE value in the dataset. The samples colored in red show the total uncertainty greater
than two.


   Based on the analysis of the previous experiment, we attempted to evaluate the quality
of synthetic data. Synthetic PCE values in the CEP dataset 23 was obtained from the Schar-
ber model with statistical approximations. 46 In this procedure, unintentional errors can be
involved in the resulting synthetic data. Since the aleatoric uncertainty arises due to data
quality, we evaluated quality of the synthetic data by analyzing the uncertainties of predicted


                                               11
PCE values. We used the same dataset in Duvenaud et al. 1 for training and test.
      Figure 3 shows the scatter plot of three uncertainties in the CEP predictions for 5,995
molecules in the test set. Samples with the total uncertainty greater than two are high-
lighted with red color. Some samples with large PCE values above eight had relatively large
total uncertainties. Their PCE values deviated considerably from the black line in Figure
3-(d). More interestingly, we found that most molecules with the zero PCE value had large
total uncertainties as well. Those large uncertainties came from the aleatoric uncertainty
as depicted in Figure 3-(a), indicating that the data quality of those particular samples is
relatively poor. Hence, we speculated that data inherent noises might cause large prediction
errors.
      To elaborate the origin of such errors, we investigated the procedure of obtaining the
PCE values. The Havard Organic Photovolatic Dataset 47 contains both experimental and
synthetic PCE values of 350 organic photovoltaic materials. The synthetic PCE values were
computed according to (17), which is the result of the Scharber model. 46


                                   PCE ∝ VOC × F F × JSC ,                                  (17)


where VOC is an open circuit potential, F F is a fill factor, and JSC is a short circuit current
density. F F was set to 65%. VOC and JSC were obtained from electronic structure calculations
of molecules. 23 We found that JSC of some molecules were zero or nearly zero, resulting in zero
or almost zero synthetic PCE values, in contrast to their non-zero experimental PCE values.
Especially, JSC and PCE values computed using the M06-2X functional 48 were almost zero
consistently. We suspect that those approximated values caused a significant drop of data
quality, resulting in large aleatoric uncertainties as highlighted in Figure 3. Consequently, the
data noise due to poorly fabricated data was identified as the large aleatoric uncertainties.
  1
      https://github.com/HIPS/neural-fingerprint




                                               12
Uncertainty as confidence indicator: bio-activity and toxicity clas-

sification




Figure 4: (a) Aleatoric, (b) epistemic and (c) total uncertainty of predicted probabilities in
the classification of bio-activity against the EGFR target.


   In this experiment, we demonstrate that the uncertainty analysis can lead reliable clas-
sification. In classification problems, it tends to interpret the final outputs from a sigmoid
or softmax activation as their confidence, which means that the higher the output proba-
bility, the higher the prediction accuracy. However, as Gal and Ghahramani pointed out,
such interpretation is erroneous. 39 Thus, we applied the uncertainty quantification on the
bio-activity and toxicity classification problems and show that the predictive uncertainty can
be used as the confidence of outcomes.




Figure 5: Test accuracy for the classifications of (a) bio-activities against the five target
proteins in the DUD-E set and (b) the five toxic effects in the Tox21 set.


                                             13
   We trained the Bayesian GCN using 25,627 molecules with the labels for EGFR-activity
in the DUD-E dataset. Figure 4 shows the results for 7,118 molecules in the test set. In order
for the predictive uncertainty to be interpreted as a confidence, its value should be minimum
on the output probability of zero or one and should be maximum on that of 0.5. Indeed,
the total uncertainty predicted from our model shows such behaviour. In other words, more
uncertain outcomes have lower predictive probability values. We also noted that the aleatoric
uncertainty affected the total uncertainty more significantly than the epistemic uncertainty
did.
   To further investigate a relationship between accuracy and uncertainty, we trained the
Bayesian GCN for various bio-activity labels in the DUD-E dataset and toxicity labels in the
Tox21 dataset. Then, we sorted the molecules in the order of increasing uncertainty and then
divided them into five groups as follows: molecules in the i-th group have total uncertainties
in the range of ((i − 1) × 0.1, i × 0.1). Figure 5 shows the classification accuracy of each
group; (a) and (b) denote the classification results of bio-acitvities against the five different
targets and the five different toxicities of Tox21 set molecules, respectively. This result is an
evidence that the uncertainty can be used as a confidence indicator in binary classification
problems.



Conclusion

Deep neural network models show promising performances in the prediction of molecular
properties. In practical applications, however, a lack of data quality and quantity discourages
developing accurate models. To make reliable decisions in such a case, we have proposed to
analyze uncertainties in the prediction results by using the Bayesian GCN.
   Our first experiment on the logP prediction showed that data inherent noise can be
identified by the aleatoric uncertainty. The aleatoric uncertainty in the predicted logP values
increases as the amount of noise increases. In contrast, the epistemic uncertainty slightly



                                               14
depends on the data noise as expected. In the second experiment, we applied the uncertainty
analysis to the Harvard Clean Energy Project dataset. It was able to identify erroneous
data by noting the abnormally increased aleatoric uncertainty in the poorly approximated
synthetic data, which is helpful to find the source of the errors. In the third experiment of
bio-activity and toxicity predictions, we showed that the uncertainty is closely related to
the confidence of prediction for binary classification problems. As grouping the molecules in
the increasing order of uncertainty, the groups with lower uncertainty show higher accuracy
than those with higher uncertainty.
   We have demonstrated how useful the uncertainty quantification is in molecular appli-
cations. By using the Bayesian GCN, we can analyze the quality of data that is often noisy
because of the stochastic nature of experimental results. From the relationship between
output probability and confidence of prediction, it is able to extract more reliable results
selectively from entire predictions, which is critical to making a desirable decision. Such
analysis can be used to screen bio-active and toxic molecules, where reliable prediction is
vital. We believe that our study on the uncertainty quantification of molecular properties
offers insights to tackle AI-safety problems in molecular applications.



References

 (1) Gomes, J.; Ramsundar, B.; Feinberg, E. N.; Pande, V. S. Atomic convolutional networks
     for predicting protein-ligand binding affinity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10603 2017,

 (2) Jiménez, J.; Skalic, M.; Martı́nez-Rosell, G.; De Fabritiis, G. K DEEP: Protein–Ligand
     Absolute Binding Affinity Prediction via 3D-Convolutional Neural Networks. Journal
     of chemical information and modeling 2018, 58, 287–296.

 (3) Mayr, A.; Klambauer, G.; Unterthiner, T.; Hochreiter, S. DeepTox: toxicity prediction
     using deep learning. Frontiers in Environmental Science 2016, 3, 80.



                                             15
 (4) Öztürk, H.; Özgür, A.; Ozkirimli, E. DeepDTA: deep drug–target binding affinity pre-
     diction. Bioinformatics 2018, 34, i821–i829.

 (5) De Cao, N.; Kipf, T. MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11973 2018,

 (6) Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M.; Sánchez-
     Lengeling, B. et al. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous repre-
     sentation of molecules. ACS central science 2018, 4, 268–276.

 (7) Guimaraes, G. L.; Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; Outeiral, C.; Farias, P. L. C.; Aspuru-
     Guzik, A. Objective-reinforced generative adversarial networks (ORGAN) for sequence
     generation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10843 2017,

 (8) Jin, W.; Barzilay, R.; Jaakkola, T. Junction Tree Variational Autoencoder for Molecular
     Graph Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04364 2018,

 (9) Kusner, M. J.; Paige, B.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M. Grammar variational autoencoder.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01925 2017,

(10) Li, Y.; Vinyals, O.; Dyer, C.; Pascanu, R.; Battaglia, P. Learning deep generative models
     of graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03324 2018,

(11) Segler, M. H.; Kogej, T.; Tyrchan, C.; Waller, M. P. Generating focused molecule li-
     braries for drug discovery with recurrent neural networks. ACS central science 2017,
     4, 120–131.

(12) You, J.; Liu, B.; Ying, R.; Pande, V.; Leskovec, J. Graph Convolutional Policy Network
     for Goal-Directed Molecular Graph Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02473 2018,

(13) Segler, M. H.; Preuss, M.; Waller, M. P. Planning chemical syntheses with deep neural
     networks and symbolic AI. Nature 2018, 555, 604.



                                             16
(14) Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Neural networks for the prediction of
     organic chemistry reactions. ACS central science 2016, 2, 725–732.

(15) Zhou, Z.; Li, X.; Zare, R. N. Optimizing chemical reactions with deep reinforcement
     learning. ACS central science 2017, 3, 1337–1344.

(16) Faber, F. A.; Hutchison, L.; Huang, B.; Gilmer, J.; Schoenholz, S. S. et al. Prediction
     errors of molecular machine learning models lower than hybrid DFT error. Journal of
     chemical theory and computation 2017, 13, 5255–5264.

(17) Gilmer, J.; Schoenholz, S. S.; Riley, P. F.; Vinyals, O.; Dahl, G. E. Neural message
     passing for quantum chemistry. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01212 2017,

(18) Schütt, K.; Kindermans, P.-J.; Felix, H. E. S.; Chmiela, S.; Tkatchenko, A. et al. SchNet:
     A continuous-filter convolutional neural network for modeling quantum interactions.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017; pp 991–1001.

(19) Schütt, K. T.; Arbabzadah, F.; Chmiela, S.; Müller, K. R.; Tkatchenko, A. Quantum-
     chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks. Nature communications 2017, 8,
     13890.

(20) Smith, J. S.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. ANI-1: an extensible neural network potential
     with DFT accuracy at force field computational cost. Chemical science 2017, 8, 3192–
     3203.

(21) Feinberg, E. N.; Sur, D.; Husic, B. E.; Mai, D.; Li, Y. et al. Spatial Graph Convolutions
     for Drug Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.04465 2018,

(22) Liu, Z.; Su, M.; Han, L.; Liu, J.; Yang, Q. et al. Forging the basis for developing
     protein–ligand interaction scoring functions. Accounts of chemical research 2017, 50,
     302–309.




                                              17
(23) Hachmann, J.; Olivares-Amaya, R.; Atahan-Evrenk, S.; Amador-Bedolla, C.; Sánchez-
     Carrera, R. S. et al. The Harvard clean energy project: large-scale computational screen-
     ing and design of organic photovoltaics on the world community grid. The Journal of
     Physical Chemistry Letters 2011, 2, 2241–2251.

(24) Mysinger, M. M.; Carchia, M.; Irwin, J. J.; Shoichet, B. K. Directory of useful decoys,
     enhanced (DUD-E): better ligands and decoys for better benchmarking. Journal of
     medicinal chemistry 2012, 55, 6582–6594.

(25) Gal, Y. Uncertainty in deep learning. University of Cambridge 2016,

(26) Begoli, E.; Bhattacharya, T.; Kusnezov, D. The need for uncertainty quantification in
     machine-assisted medical decision making. Nature Machine Intelligence 2019, 1, 20.

(27) McAllister, R.; Gal, Y.; Kendall, A.; Van Der Wilk, M.; Shah, A. et al. Concrete prob-
     lems for autonomous vehicle safety: advantages of Bayesian deep learning. 2017.

(28) Kendall, A.; Gal, Y. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for
     computer vision? Advances in neural information processing systems. 2017; pp 5574–
     5584.

(29) Kwon, Y.; Won, J.-H.; Kim, B. J.; Paik, M. C. Uncertainty quantification using Bayesian
     neural networks in classification: Application to ischemic stroke lesion segmentation.
     international conference on medical imaging with deep learning. 2018.

(30) Der Kiureghian, A.; Ditlevsen, O. Aleatory or epistemic? Does it matter? Structural
     Safety 2009, 31, 105–112.

(31) Duvenaud, D. K.; Maclaurin, D.; Iparraguirre, J.; Bombarell, R.; Hirzel, T. et al. Con-
     volutional networks on graphs for learning molecular fingerprints. Advances in neural
     information processing systems. 2015; pp 2224–2232.




                                             18
(32) Kipf, T. N.; Welling, M. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
     works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 2016,

(33) Ryu, S.; Lim, J.; Kim, W. Y. Deeply learning molecular structure-property relationships
     using graph attention neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10988 2018,

(34) Irwin, J. J.; Shoichet, B. K. ZINC- A free database of commercially available compounds
     for virtual screening. Journal of chemical information and modeling 2005, 45, 177–182.

(35) Blundell, C.; Cornebise, J.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Wierstra, D. Weight uncertainty in neural
     networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.05424 2015,

(36) Graves, A. Practical variational inference for neural networks. Advances in neural in-
     formation processing systems. 2011; pp 2348–2356.

(37) Louizos, C.; Welling, M. Multiplicative normalizing flows for variational bayesian neural
     networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01961 2017,

(38) Srivastava, N.; Hinton, G.; Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout:
     a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine
     Learning Research 2014, 15, 1929–1958.

(39) Gal, Y.; Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Representing model
     uncertainty in deep learning. international conference on machine learning. 2016; pp
     1050–1059.

(40) Battaglia, P. W.; Hamrick, J. B.; Bapst, V.; Sanchez-Gonzalez, A.; Zambaldi, V.
     et al. Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1806.01261 2018,

(41) Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L. et al. Attention is all you
     need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017; pp 5998–6008.



                                              19
(42) Velickovic, P.; Cucurull, G.; Casanova, A.; Romero, A.; Lio, P. et al. Graph attention
     networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 2017,

(43) Gal, Y.; Hron, J.; Kendall, A. Concrete dropout. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems. 2017; pp 3581–3590.

(44) Kingma, D. P.; Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1412.6980 2014,

(45) Landrum, G. RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. 2006.

(46) Scharber, M. C.; Mühlbacher, D.; Koppe, M.; Denk, P.; Waldauf, C. et al. Design rules
     for donors in bulk-heterojunction solar cells—Towards 10% energy-conversion efficiency.
     Advanced materials 2006, 18, 789–794.

(47) Lopez, S. A.; Pyzer-Knapp, E. O.; Simm, G. N.; Lutzow, T.; Li, K. et al. The Harvard
     organic photovoltaic dataset. Scientific data 2016, 3, 160086.

(48) Zhao, Y.; Truhlar, D. G. The M06 suite of density functionals for main group thermo-
     chemistry, thermochemical kinetics, noncovalent interactions, excited states, and transi-
     tion elements: two new functionals and systematic testing of four M06-class functionals
     and 12 other functionals. Theoretical Chemistry Accounts 2008, 120, 215–241.




                                             20
Graphical TOC Entry
          Some journals require a graphical entry for the Table of Contents. This
          should be laid out “print ready” so that the sizing of the text is correct.
          Inside the tocentry environment, the font used is Helvetica 8 pt, as re-
          quired by Journal of the American Chemical Society.
          The surrounding frame is 9 cm by 3.5 cm, which is the maximum per-
          mitted for Journal of the American Chemical Society graphical table of
          content entries. The box will not resize if the content is too big: instead
          it will overflow the edge of the box.
          This box and the associated title will always be printed on a separate
          page at the end of the document.




                                             21
