                                             Evaluating Scalable Uncertainty Estimation
                                            Methods for DNN-Based Molecular Property
                                                                            Prediction




arXiv:1910.03127v1 [cs.LG] 7 Oct 2019
                                            Gabriele Scalia,†,‡ Colin A. Grambow,† Barbara Pernici,‡ Yi-Pei Li,∗,¶ and

                                                                          William H. Green∗,†

                                        †Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
                                                                            MA, 02139, USA
                                        ‡Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, 20133
                                                                               Milano, Italy
                                        ¶Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

                                                                E-mail: yipeili@ntu.edu.tw; whgreen@mit.edu



                                        Abstract

                                        Advances in deep neural network (DNN) based molecular property prediction have recently
                                        led to the development of models of remarkable accuracy and generalization ability, with
                                        graph convolution neural networks (GCNNs) reporting state-of-the-art performance for this
                                        task. However, some challenges remain and one of the most important that needs to be fully
                                        addressed concerns uncertainty quantification. DNN performance is affected by the volume
                                        and the quality of the training samples. Therefore, establishing when and to what extent
                                        a prediction can be considered reliable is just as important as outputting accurate predic-
                                        tions, especially when out-of-domain molecules are targeted. Recently, several methods to

                                                                                    1
account for uncertainty in DNNs have been proposed, most of which are based on approx-
imate Bayesian inference. Among these, only a few scale to the large datasets required in
applications. Evaluating and comparing these methods has recently attracted great interest,
but results are generally fragmented and absent for molecular property prediction. In this
paper, we aim to quantitatively compare scalable techniques for uncertainty estimation in
GCNNs. We introduce a set of quantitative criteria to capture different uncertainty aspects,
and then use these criteria to compare MC-Dropout, deep ensembles, and bootstrapping,
both theoretically in a unified framework that separates aleatoric/epistemic uncertainty and
experimentally on the QM9 dataset. Our experiments quantify the performance of the
different uncertainty estimation methods and their impact on uncertainty-related error re-
duction. Our findings indicate that ensembling and bootstrapping consistently outperform
MC-Dropout, with different context-specific pros and cons. Our analysis also leads to a bet-
ter understanding of the role of aleatoric/epistemic uncertainty and highlights the challenge
posed by out-of-domain uncertainty.



Introduction

Deep Neural Network (DNN) based molecular property prediction has received new atten-
tion recently with the development of models capable of promising performance on large
and heterogeneous datasets. 1–3 In particular, recent progresses in graph convolution neural
network 4 (GCNN) — also known as message passing neural network (MPNN) — have led to
state-of-the-art performance for property prediction across a range of public and proprietary
datasets, 1 demonstrating both accuracy and generalization gains. However, some limita-
tions still hold, and uncertainty quantification has recently been highlighted as an important
direction to be investigated. 1
   The need for an effective uncertainty quantification is driven by both intrinsic character-
istics of DNN models and by peculiar features of chemical space. In general, standard DNN



                                              2
models do not output confidence estimates, since regression models only output a mean,
while classification outputs cannot be reliably interpreted as confidence scores. 5
   DNN performance strongly depend on the volume and the quality of training data, hence
the need to assess when and to what extent a prediction can be considered reliable. While
this has emerged in the context of DNN in several heterogeneous applications, most of which
are based on computer vision, 6 DNN for chemistry is characterized by additional challenges.
First of all, chemical training data are intrinsically biased, 7 since the chemical space has
an extremely large variability and therefore a training dataset cannot represent the whole
space. Moreover, chemical training data are often limited in volume and quality, directly
reflected in DNN outputs. Additionally, doing predictions on molecules rather different to
those seen during training is often the actual goal in the field, for example in drug discovery
applications. This demands good generalization performance on one side, but also being able
to identify the model’s knowledge boundary, i.e. assessing to what extent the model knows
what it knows.
   While uncertainty estimation in this domain has been investigated in the context of
shallow models in the last few years, 8 uncertainty in DNN and GCNN models for molecular
property prediction has been addressed only recently and is still limited and fragmented.
   Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) have long been studied as an effective and princi-
pled way to take into account model uncertainty in the predictions of a DNN, 9 but the
intractability of exact Bayesian inference together with the limited practicality of the ap-
proaches proposed until the last few years has prevented the widespread diffusion of these
solutions in applications until recently. 5 The recent work from Gal and Ghahramani 10 gave
a decisive contribution to the spread of approximate BNNs in applications, proposing Monte
Carlo Dropout (MC-Dropout), a practical method based on the widely used dropout regular-
ization technique, to account for model uncertainty. Moreover, Kendall and Gal 6 proposed
a framework to separate epistemic uncertainty, which refers to uncertainty in the model
predictions, from the aleatoric uncertainty, which captures noise inherent in the data. MC-


                                               3
Dropout has been used in various applications, including, very recently, molecular property
prediction. 7,11
   Other techniques to efficiently approximate BNNs have been proposed since then, high-
lighting how finding a good trade-off between effective approximation and scalability remains
an important open challenge. Notably, the ensemble-based approach proposed by Lakshmi-
narayanan et al. 12 constitutes a simple and scalable technique to obtain well-calibrated
uncertainty estimates and has been already used in several applications across different
fields (e.g., Fauw et al. 13 , Tomašev et al. 14 ). Moreover, even if originally proposed as a
non-Bayesian alternative to estimate uncertainty in DNNs, 12 recent work highlighted how
ensembling in DNN can be traced back to Bayesian inference. 15–17
   In parallel to the development of methods to efficiently approximate BNNs, their evalu-
ation, and in particular their comparative assessment, has recently attracted great interest
given the challenges it poses. 17–20 Indeed, we usually do not have “ground truth uncertain-
ties”, which prevents using traditional benchmarks. Furthermore, evaluating uncertainty
involves measuring the model’s unknowns and taking into account domain-specific features.
First comparative assessments have been conducted for computer vision tasks. 17,19,20 How-
ever, results are still fragmented and no comparisons have been carried out for GCNN in
the chemistry domain, which poses specific challenges such as uncertainty generalization in
the chemical space. Moreover, many metrics traditionally used to evaluate uncertain fore-
casts, like calibration, have been defined in a classification setting, while their extension for
regression — needed for scalar molecular properties — has been discussed only recently. 21,22
   Comparative analysis of different methods calls for multiple metrics and quantitative
indices. By contrast, recent works targeting uncertainty estimation for DNN-based molecular
property prediction only employ a single technique, such as confidence-error diagrams, and
qualitative evaluations. 7,11
   The goals of this work are as follows. First of all, we review existing methods for un-
certainty estimation in DNN/GCNN, focusing on scalable techniques that can be used in


                                               4
applications. We contextualize them in a unique framework to estimate aleatoric and epis-
temic uncertainty, also in light of their recent interpretations, and we draw a theoretical
comparison. Secondly, we introduce a set of uncertainty evaluation criteria, based both
on existing benchmarks used in other fields and on chemistry-specific features. Finally, we
implement the presented uncertainty estimation methods using as base model a recently
published state-of-the-art GCNN for molecular property prediction (chemprop 1 ) and we ex-
perimentally compare them through the introduced evaluation criteria on the QM9 dataset
for the regression task. In doing so, we highlight the behaviors characterizing all the methods
in the context of GCNN-based molecular property prediction and their differences due to
different approximation schemes. Furthermore, we discuss and quantify the positive impact
of modelling uncertainty in the network on the prediction error.



Methods

This section is organized as follows. We first summarize GCNNs, which constitute the
state-of-the-art for DNN-based molecular property prediction. We then review Bayesian
Uncertainty Estimation in DNNs, detailing the methods that will be tested. Finally, we
discuss uncertainty evaluation and related metrics. An overview of a GCNN extended as a
DNN is shown in Figure 1.


Graph Convolutional Neural Networks

In general, a GCNN used for property prediction takes as input a molecular graph G, where
the nodes are atoms and the edges are bonds, with each atom vi initialized with the feature
vector h0i and each bond vi − vj with the feature vector ei,j and then operates in two phases
(see Figure 1). During the first phase — message passing — each atom’s feature vector is
updated based on the neighbors’ features and related bond representations. This phase is
executed K times, iteratively, so that in the steps following the first one each atom’s feature


                                              5
                                                    Message passing phase                                                                                       Readout phase


           Initial atoms and                                                                              Learned atoms
           bonds representations                                                                          representation
           ℎ((                                       ℎ)(                                                       ℎ(5

            .            ℎ#( , 𝑒(,#                   .               ℎ#54) , 𝑒(,#                             .
                                             MPNN                                                  MPNN
                        {𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣( } …                                                          …
            .
                 𝑣#    𝑒(,# 𝑒(,8
                                                      .     … 𝑣 𝑒      {𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣( }
                                                                               𝑒(,8
                                                                                                               .
            .                          𝑣8             .          #      (,#
                                                                                          𝑣8                   .
                         𝑣(                                                 𝑣(                                                 Learned molecular
                                                                                                                                                                                Output properties
                          𝑒(,… 𝑣
                                   …
                                                                             𝑒(,… 𝑣
                                                                                      …
                                                                                                                               representation
           ℎ)(                                       ℎ))                                                      ℎ)5                     ℎ                                                              𝑦




                                                                                                                                              Fully connected                      Fully connected
            .            ℎ#( , 𝑒),#                   .               ℎ#54) , 𝑒),#                             .                      .                          .                                   .
                                             MPNN           …                                      MPNN                                                                   …
                        {𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣) } …                                  {𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣) }             …
    HO
            .                                         .                                                        .           +          .                          .                                   .
            .          𝑣#   𝑒),#                      .                𝑣#     𝑒),#                             .                      .                          .                                   .
                                𝑣) 𝑒),…                                         𝑣) 𝑒),…
                      𝑣8 𝑒),8                                        𝑣8 𝑒),8
                                        𝑣…                                                 𝑣…
N
           …                                 …       …                                             …          …
           ℎ3(                                       ℎ)3                                                      ℎ35

                         ℎ#( , 𝑒3,#                   .               ℎ#54) , 𝑒3,#                             .
            .
                                             MPNN            …                                     MPNN
                        {𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣3 } …
                                                      .
                                                                       {𝑖 ∈ 𝑁 𝑣3 }             …               .
            .
            .                  𝑒3,8 𝑣8                .                         𝑒3,8 𝑣8                        .
                                                                        𝑒3,#
                  𝑣#
                        𝑒3,#
                             𝑣3                                   𝑣#           𝑣3                                                                                        𝑝
                            𝑒3,…                                              𝑒3,…
                                   𝑣…                                                 𝑣…



                                                                                                                                                                                                     𝑦#

                                                                                           𝑝




                                                                                                                    𝑊#



Figure 1: Illustrative overview of a GCNN for molecular property prediction extended as a
BNN.
Message passing phase. Starting from a molecular graph, the model extracts an initial rep-
resentation h0i for each atom vi and a bond representation ei,j for each bond between vi and
vj . At each step, the atom representation is updated based on the representation of the
atom’s neighbors and the related bonds. hji refers to the representation for the i-th atom
at the j-th update step, N (vi ) are the atom’s neighbors. At the end (K update steps) the
molecule representation h results from the sum of the learned atoms features.
Readout phase. The molecular representation is updated through a series of fully connected
layers obtaining the output vector y.
The peculiarity of a BNN is to model network weights and outputs as probability distribu-
tions (e.g., Gaussians), instead of point estimates. This allows taking into account uncer-
tainty — epistemic and aleatoric, respectively — in the model.




                                                                                                          6
htv is updated based on already updated neighbors features. This allows the interaction of
distant atoms in the resulting representations. At the end, the molecule representation is
given by the sum of its atoms representations. The second phase — readout — is based on
a feedforward neural network that uses the final representation of the molecule to predict
some properties of interest. Intuitively, the message passing phase allows the model to learn
its own feature representations directly from data, while the readout phase allows learning
the relationship between such representations and output properties. The model is trained
as a whole to maximize the likelihood.
       Starting from this general description, several specific networks improvements have been
recently proposed. 1–3,11,23 Given the goal of this paper of evaluating large-scale uncertainty
estimation, we start from a well-tested network, chemprop, 1 that recently reported state-
of-the-art performance on multiple datasets. One of the peculiar features of this network
is the usage of messages associated with directed edges (bonds) instead of vertices (atoms),
improving the effectiveness of the messages exchanged. Interested readers can refer to the
original work by Yang et al. 1 for the details.
       The techniques explored in this paper do not depend on a specific network, and the
resulting comparative performance should hold for any GCNN model. We extended the
chemprop model for this work to include the uncertainty estimation and evaluation methods
presented next. The software developed has been made availablei .


Bayesian Uncertainty Estimation

Uncertainty can be the result of inherent data noise or could be related to what the model
does not yet know. These two kind of uncertainties — aleatoric and epistemic — are reviewed
in the next two sections, together with scalable techniques which have been proposed for their
approximate computation. At the end, we discuss how these two kinds of uncertainty can
be combined to obtain the total uncertainty of a prediction.
   i
       https://github.com/gscalia/chemprop



                                                  7
Aleatoric Uncertainty

When not explicitly modeled, the inherent observation noise is assumed constant for every
observed molecule. This defines a homoscedastic aleatoric uncertainty, i.e. an uncertainty
which does not vary over the data distribution and is essentially only task-dependent. 24
However, this assumption does not hold in many realistic settings, where input-dependent
noise needs to be modeled. For chemistry applications, it is usually difficult to derive a large
number of high-quality data; therefore, one often needs to use multiple data sources to com-
pose a large enough dataset to train a model. Data derived from different sources are often
measured or calculated with different methods, and thus are associated with different levels
of intrinsic noise. Data-dependent aleatoric uncertainty is referred to as heteroscedastic 25
and its importance for DNNs has been recently highlighted, 6 also for molecular property
prediction. 11

                      Initial atoms and                             Learned molecular
                      bonds representation                          representation
                        ℎ"" ℎ*"       ℎ+"       𝑒-.                        ℎ

     Input molecule                                                                               𝜇(𝑥)     Output means
                         .   .         .
                                                          Message          .

                                                                                        Readout
                                                 .
          𝑥              .   .    …    .    …    .    …                    .
                         .   .         .         .        Passing          .
                                                                                                  𝜎() (𝑥) Output variances

Figure 2: Aleatoric uncertainty estimation assuming an underlying Gaussian error. The last
layer of the DNN is split to predict both the mean µ and the variance σ for each output
property and the network is trained minimizing the loss (Equation (2)). The predicted means
correspond to the output properties, the predicted variances correspond to the aleatoric
uncertainties (one for each property).


   Since aleatoric uncertainty is a property of data, it can be learned directly from data
adapting the model and the loss function. Assuming an underlying Gaussian error, the
model (parameters θ) can estimate both the mean µ and the variance σ 2 of the output
distribution y given an input x:


                                                 p (y | x, θ) = N µθ (x) , σθ2 (x)
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                             (1)


                                                                      8
   This does not require “noise labels” but only changing the loss function. Indeed, by
performing maximum a posteriori estimation (MAP) inference we obtain: 26

                                    N
                               1 X      1                         1
                       L (θ) ∝         2
                                               kyi − µθ (xi )k22 + log σθ2 (xi )             (2)
                               N i=1 2σθ (xi )                    2

with an additional weight decay term. Notice that, assuming a homoscedastic uncertainty,
minimizing Eq. (2) coincides with the usual MSE. In practice, the last layer of the DNN is
split to predict both µθ and σθ2 , and the network is trained using Eq. (2), with σθ2 implicitly
learned. The output σθ2 corresponds to the heteroscedastic aleatoric uncertainty: σa2 = σθ2 .
This is shown in Figure 2.
   Interestingly, σθ2 in Eq. (2) can be interpreted as a learned loss attenuation. 6 Intuitively,
the network can learn to increase σθ2 to reduce the impact of uncertain predictions on the
overall loss. The second term prevents outputting an infinite uncertainty for every point.
   This approach is very practical, requiring minimal modifications to the original network,
and can be used independently of the technique chosen to model weight uncertainty (epis-
temic uncertainty). Indeed, it has been used in conjunction with both MC-Dropout 6 and
ensembling. 12
   The output distribution does not need to be necessarily Gaussian (see Figure 1 for a
general case). In some cases, a Gaussian distribution might not be enough to model the out-
put properties, and more complex models could be used, such as Mixture Density Networks
(MDN), 27 which have been recently employed to model aleatoric uncertainty in DNN, 28 or
Compound Density Networks, 29 which represent a continuous extension of MDN. These so-
lutions allow more flexible output distributions at the cost of more complex loss functions
that may translate into less optimized and stable training. These extensions are beyond the
scope of this paper.
   Being predicted as a data variance, aleatoric uncertainty cannot account for uncertainty in
the model’s parameters θ or for other data-independent factors. Moreover, the MAP estimate



                                                  9
does not take into account multiple plausible values for θ but only the most probable one.
This can be overcome by performing Bayesian inference, as discussed next.


Epistemic uncertainty

In a BNN the weights θ are modeled as distributions learned from training data D, instead
of point estimates, and therefore it is possible to predict the output distribution y of some
new input x through the predictive posterior distribution, Eq. (3).

                                             Z
                            p (y | x, D) =       p (y | x, θ) p (θ | D) dθ                 (3)


Equation (3) allows taking into account the epistemic uncertainty because a prediction is
the “weighted sum” of each outcome for each possible θ configuration of the model, with
more probable θ configurations having a higher weight. The probability of a θ configuration
depends on training data D.
   Monte Carlo integration over M samples θ(i) of the posterior distribution p (θ | D) can
approximate the intractable integral, however obtaining samples directly from the posterior
distribution is virtually impossible for neural networks. Therefore, an approximate distribu-
tion q (θ) ≈ p (θ | D) is introduced.
   Several methods to sample from q (θ) have been introduced. The pioneering work by
Neal, 9 employing the MCMC variant Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), is currently con-
sidered the gold standard, but its applicability is limited to small networks and datasets.
Stochastic and optimized variations have since been explored to enhance scalability at the
expense of approximation performance. 30,31
   Variational Inference (VI) is an alternative paradigm to derive q (θ). In this case, a class
of approximating distributions qφ (θ) parameterized by φ is explicitly chosen, so that poste-
rior approximation becomes an optimization problem of finding φ miniziming the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence with respect to p (θ | D). The set of approximating distributions is



                                                  10
pre-defined and performance will depend on the search space and the employed optimization
procedure.
   VI methods constitute a standard technique in Bayesian modelling. However, scalability
requirements and NN-specific features have led to the design of new methods for this class of
models in the last few years. 10,15,32–34 Nonetheless, some of these approaches — such as Stein
Variational Gradient Descent 34 — do not actually scale up to training-intensive applications
such as active learning based molecular property prediction. 7
   MC-Dropout and ensembling-based methods are currently the most popular approaches
for large-scale uncertainty estimation in NNs 17 and, within chemistry, both have been very
recently introduced. 7,11,35–37 In addition to their scalability, these methods owe their popu-
larity to the relative ease of implementation, since both leverage well-known techniques for
regularization and accuracy improvement. For this reason, in the following we will focus
on MC-Dropout and ensembling, describing both the original methods, main variations (in
particular, bootstrapping), recent improvements and interpretations.


Monte Carlo Dropout MC-Dropout 6,10 is a simple and scalable VI approach. The al-
gorithm consists in training a network with dropout before every layer and then, at testing
time, keeping dropout to sample M outputs y(i) with different random masks. Each different
random dropout mask corresponds to a sample from the approximate posterior qφ (θ). The
model prediction ỹ is the mean of the different outputs, while the epistemic uncertainty
σe2 can be captured by the variance of the different outputs. If the aleatoric uncertainty is
also computed (as in Figure 2), the output aleatoric uncertainty is the mean of the different
aleatoric uncertainty estimates (and, in this case, the y(i) are substituted by the µ(i) ):

                            1 X (i)                                 1 X (i)
                                       σe2 = var y(i)       σa2 =
                                                        
                     ỹ =      y                                       σa                     (4)
                            M                                       M

   Formally, the MC-Dropout algorithm approximates the posterior with a product of
Bernoulli distributions. Indeed, given a dropout probability p, each unit of the network

                                               11
with parameters θi has probability p of being dropped and set to zero. Equivalently, the
approximation distribution can be seen as a mixture of two Gaussians with small variances
and the mean of one of the Gaussians is fixed at zero. 6,10
   A drawback of the MC-Dropout approach is the introduction of the dropout rate p as
hyper-parameter. Such a choice has an important impact both on the model’s accuracy
and the uncertainty estimation. Indeed, p contributes to determine the magnitude of the
epistemic uncertainty. Moreover, this hinders model hyper-parametrization, especially if p
is chosen to be layer-dependent.
   Among the methods proposed in the literature to automatically tune the dropout prob-
ability, Concrete Dropout 38 represents a practical gradient-based solution which follows
dropout’s variational interpretation. This approach has demonstrated comparable perfor-
mance with respect to grid-searched p 38 and an improvement in model calibration with
respect to standard MC-Dropout. 20 Therefore, we will compare this non-parametric version
of MC-Dropout to the intrinsically non-parametric ensembling approach.


Ensembling Ensembling has been introduced as a practical non-Bayesian alternative to
estimate uncertainty in Lakshminarayanan et al. 12 . The algorithm consists in training the
same network multiple times with a random initialization, minimizing the MLE objective
− log p (y | x, θ) each time. The output of the ensemble is given by the mean of the pre-
dictions, while the variance corresponds to the ensemble uncertainty, as in Equation (4) for
MC-Dropout.
   It is possible to draw a parallel between ensembling and MC-Dropout, since the latter can
also be interpreted as a form of ensembling 12,39 with weight sharing between the models. Even
if ensembling has been originally proposed as a non-Bayesian solution, 12 recent literature
has proved how, with minor modifications to the original ensembling methodology, it is
possible to interpret it as a Bayesian inference technique. 15,16 Nonetheless, even without the
modifications, ensembling can be interpreted as Bayesian approximation with an implicit



                                              12
distribution q (θ). 17
   Ensemble methods have long been recognized as very effective to improve predictive
performance of machine learning 40 and deep learning models, 41 and their effectiveness for this
purpose has been assessed even recently in chemistry for QSPR. 1 The reason why ensembling
allows reducing the overall error with respect to each of components resides in the diversity of
their errors. Indeed, perfectly correlated errors do not bring any advantage to the ensemble
error, while perfectly uncorrelated errors reduce the expected ensemble error proportionally
to the number of employed instances. 41 Different solutions can be easily reached by deep
models given their nonconvexity and the sub-optimal optimization strategies employed.
   The intuition behind the interpretation of the ensemble variance as model uncertainty
is simple. Different instances of the ensemble of models will tend to output similar values
when the inputs are similar to the observed training data, because each instance’s weights,
even if different, are optimized for those data. In contrast, as inputs become less similar to
the training data, the outputs of each instance tend to be more affected by the specificities
of the sub-optimal solution reached, thus the higher variance. Given this, it seems clear
that diversity in the ensembled models should be promoted both for error reduction and
uncertainty improvement.
   Traditional regularization techniques, such as weight decay and early stopping, affect the
solutions reached by NNs. Recently, the usage of these techniques has been proposed not
only as a practical strategy to increase ensemble diversity, but also as a formal evidence for
a Bayesian interpretation of ensembling. 15,16 This is discussed in the next paragraph.


Anchored Ensembles and early stopping Anchored ensembling 16 modifies traditional
ensembling leveraging the randomised MAP sampling technique. This technique exploits the
fact that injecting some noise in the loss function of a MAP estimate allows sampling from
the true posterior. Therefore, an ensemble of such models is a simple and scalable approach
for approximate Bayesian inference.



                                              13
       It is known that the commonly used L2 regularization for NN (weight decay) corresponds
to the MAP estimate with Gaussian priors, 41 which can be interpreted as pulling the weights
for which the network does not express a strong preference close to zero. The anchored
ensembling algorithm proposes to add noise to this loss function by changing the priors’
means. For regression, this leads to the following loss for the i-th model in the ensemble:

                                       1                 1          (i)
                                 L=      ky − ỹ(i) k22 + λkθ(i) − θ0 k22                       (5)
                                       N                 N

                                            (i)
where y are the target outputs and θ0 , which equals to zero for standard L2 regularization,
is the prior’s mean of the i-th model.
       Following this approach, each model in the ensemble has its parameters anchored to a
different θ0,i , and this promotes the diversity of the solutions reached by the different models.
       An important limitation of this approach is the need for additional hyper-parameters
that must be tuned. They include at least the regularization coefficient λ — that expresses
the ratio between data variance and weights’ prior variance — and the noise distribution
θ0,i ∼ N (0, Σ0 ). As originally described, 16 the algorithm also employs a regularization
matrix Γ instead of the scalar λ, to allow specifying per-layer regularization.
       The work presented in Duvenaud et al. 15 gives an interesting interpretation to a com-
monly exploited regularization method — early stopping — as approximate nonparamet-
ric Bayesian VI. In particular, they show how training a model to minimize the negative
log-likelihood with stochastic gradient descent (SGD)ii can be interpreted as obtaining the
approximate posterior qt (θ) parametrized by the number t of SGD steps, and demonstrate
how early stopping leads to an optimal t̃. Within this context, the initial distribution of the
model p (θ0 ) is interpreted as the prior.
       In practice, qt̃ (θ) allows sampling from the variational posterior, and therefore ensembling
different random restarts allows obtaining independent samples from the posterior, that can
then be used as in traditional ensembling (Eq. (4)). Even if the approach, as originally
  ii
       The approach is compatible also with minibatches.


                                                     14
described, does not take into consideration SGD with momentum, recent work also shows
how SGD with momentum can be interpreted as Bayesian inference. 42
   Not only is this approach practical, but ensembling with early stopping is usually already
exploited for property prediction in state-of-the-art systems. 1 In this work we use it as a
Bayesian alternative for uncertainty estimation.
   We can draw a parallelism between the two approaches described above. It has been
shown that early stopping for NNs is conceptually similar to L2 regularization, while an ex-
act equivalence holds in the simpler case of a linear model with a quadratic loss function. 41
Intuitively, both approaches restrict the optimization procedure to the vicinity of a pre-
defined value — θ0 for L2 regularization, the initial configuration for early stopping. In our
case, we notice that these two values have the same role of prior in the two approaches, 15,16
highlighting an interesting similarity. Even though they are based on different theoretical
foundations, in practice both the approaches increase the diversity in the ensembled instaces
by injecting some randomness into their regularization. An intrinsic advantage of early stop-
ping over weight decay is that early stopping automatically determines the correct amount
of regularization, instead of requiring external hyper-parameter optimization. 41 Therefore,
given the objective of this paper of evaluating scalable and practical uncertainty quantifi-
cation techniques, in the following we will focus on early stopping for our extensive tests.
Anchored ensembling and the impact of different priors for uncertainty estimation will be
the subject of future work.


Bootstrapping Also referred to as bagging, bootstrapping is a popular technique where
ensemble members, instead of being trained on the whole dataset, are trained on different
bootstrap samples of the original training set. Each bootstrap sample Di is obtained by
sampling K samples with replacement from the dataset D and therefore will include a fraction
of the elements in D and duplicates. If the original dataset is a good approximator of the
underlying distribution, each Di will also be.



                                             15
   Bootstrapping allows increasing the diversity in the trained instances, which, as previ-
ously discussed, is a key factor for ensembling performance. However, instead of relying on
diversity in the models, bootstrapping relies on diversity in the datasets.
   This approach has been successfully employed to increase the diversity in shallow ensem-
bles, but its use within NNs might be less beneficial, since, given the dependence on a large
amount of training data, each individual instance will be less powerful, thus affecting the
whole ensemble performance. 12 Moreover, recent progresses in NN understanding suggest
these models are characterized by an extremely large amount of equivalent local minima, 41
and the inherent stochasticity of SGD should already provide some degree of diversity even
when trained on the same dataset.
   Nonetheless, since bootstrapping has been recently described in the literature as an ef-
fective approach for NNs, 35,37 we aim to compare it to full-dataset ensemble in different
operating conditions to assess the differences with respect to the various evaluation metrics
introduced.

   A comparative overview of MC-Dropout, ensembling and bootstrapping is presented in
Figure 3. As shown, each method relies on a set of predictions (explicit or implicit models),
which diversity is driven by different factors. The different predictions are used to estimate
epistemic uncertainty as shown in Figure 4.


Total uncertainty

Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty can be added to approximate the total uncertainty of
a prediction. 5,6 The total uncertainty captures all the variability of the output y, which
includes both the variability coming from our ignorance about the model (epistemic un-
certainty) and variability coming from inherent randomness of the output (aleatoric uncer-
tainty). We will evaluate both the separate contributions and the total uncertainty.




                                              16
                                        GCNN1

                                                                                                   GCNN1
          Random          Dropout
          prior           mask
    𝒟              GCNN                 GCNN2                                           Random
                                                                                        prior
                                                                                𝒟                  GCNN2
                                         …
                                                                                                    …
                                        GCNNN

                                                                                                   GCNNN

(a) MC-Dropout.           Only a network is
trained to minimize the loss on the train-                                  (b) Ensembling. Different
ing dataset. Then, at testing time, multiple                                models are trained to min-
models are “generated” applying a stochas-                                  imize the loss on the same
tic dropout mask to the initial network. All                                training dataset. Diversity
the models GCNN1 ,. . . GCNNN share (part                                   in the models results from
of) the same weights. Diversity in the mod-                                 different initial configurations
els is the result of dropout masks.                                         (random priors).
                                                           Random
                                                           prior
                                                      𝒟"            GCNN1


                                                           Random
                                          Bootstrap        prior
                                    𝒟                 𝒟#            GCNN2

                                                      …              …
                                                           Random
                                                           prior
                                                      𝒟$            GCNNN



                            (c) Bootstrapping. Each model is trained
                            to minimize the loss on a bootstrap sample of
                            the training dataset. This, together with dif-
                            ferent initial configurations (random priors)
                            ensures diversity in the models.

Figure 3: Overview and comparison of MC-Dropout, ensembling and bootstrapping. D is
the training dataset.




                                                      17
                                 GCNN1      𝑦 (") (𝑥)

                       𝑥         GCNN2      𝑦 (#) (𝑥)   𝜎*# 𝑥 = 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑦 (/) )
                                  …
                                GCNNN      𝑦 ($) (𝑥)


Figure 4: Epistemic uncertainty computation. Independently from the method used to
obtain multiple models (see Figure 3), the epistemic uncertainty is estimated as the variance
of the different outputs (ref. Eq. 4). If the aleatoric uncertainty is also computed (as in
Figure 2), the output aleatoric uncertainty would be the mean of the different aleatoric
uncertainty estimates (and, in this case, y(i) would be substituted by µ(i) ).


Uncertainty Evaluation

In the following, several methods to evaluate the accuracy of uncertainty estimates are
discussed. We start from existing techniques described in the literature, merging the contri-
butions of different fields, and we extend them to account for specific features of chemical
space. We aim at identifying a set of quantitative and complementary evaluation criteria.
First, we introduce ranking based methods, i.e. evaluation criteria based on the uncertainty’s
capability of ordering predictions based on their confidence. Secondly, we discuss calibration,
i.e. “the property of predicting probability estimates representative of the true correctness
likelihood”. 18 Then, dispersion is introduced to complement calibration evaluation. Finally,
we discuss uncertainty domain shift, i.e. the property of predicting reliable uncertainty
estimates for molecules different with respect to those seen during training.


Ranking based methods

A first class of evaluation indexes is based on the ranking defined by uncertainty estimates.
This allows defining a confidence curve, which, in turn, allows defining several quantitative
indices.




                                               18
Confidence curve One way to evaluate the uncertainty is by considering how the error
varies as we remove molecules with the highest uncertainty in the test dataset. Indeed, a
meaningful uncertainty should lead to a lower error on a subset of high-confident predictions.
This concept is captured by the confidence curve, that highlights how the error varies (with
respect to a given metric, e.g. MAE or RMSE) as a function of confidence percentile (or, in
general, confidence q-quantile), i.e. the error on the subset of n% molecules (n-th q-quantile)
with the lower uncertainty.
   Ideally, we would expect a decreasing confidence curve for a meaningful uncertainty. The
error corresponding to the left-most point is simply the error on the complete test dataset; the
following points correspond to the error on the subset of testing molecules belonging to the
n-th q-quantile. Other than being decreasing, another important feature of the confidence
curve is its shape: a better uncertainty corresponds to a higher slope, because it allows
decreasing the error faster for the same amount of removed molecules. For comparison,
randomly sampling the molecules to be removed should lead to a more or less constant
function.
   What this kind of evaluation really assesses is the ordering of the predictions by their
confidence. From this perspective, the best possible ordering is the one imposed by the
true error, which has been named oracle ordering 19 in the literature. We can interpret the
oracle ordering as an uncertainty lower bound, and the oracle confidence curve is the best
confidence curve obtainable for a given model and test data.


Confidence-Oracle error and AUCO Since the oracle ordering corresponds to the lower
bound, we can define the Confidence-Oracle error as the difference between the confidence
                                                                      
                                                      (i)  (i)     (i)
curve for a given uncertainty estimation, h(i) = h1 , h2 , . . . hq−1 and oracle confidence
                                  
                (o) (o)        (o)
curve, h(o) = h1 , h2 , . . . hq−1 . In general, we want this error to be as small as possible,
therefore we introduce the Area Under the Confidence-Oracle error, AUCO, to quantify it




                                              19
in a single number iii :
                                                            q−1            
                                                            X      (i)  (o)
                                                (i)
                                                      
                                    AUCO h                =       hj − hj                                    (6)
                                                            j=1


This value allows an easy comparison between two uncertainty estimations h(i) and h(j) with
respect to the oracle, where the smaller is better.
    For this kind of comparison, it is important to highlight that every confidence curve
depends not only on the uncertainty estimation, but also on the predictive model. Indeed,
while the first defines the q-quantiles, the second provides the data for which each quantile
error is calculated. It follows that it is not possible to directly compare two confidence curves
obtained through different models to establish which uncertainty estimation is better. This
is particularly relevant because often the uncertainty estimation and the predictive model
are strongly tied: for example, ensembling is an uncertainty technique that also affects the
predictive model.
    With this regard, an added benefit of the confidence-oracle error is that, since it marginal-
izes out the oracle, it enables a fair comparison of uncertainty estimates based on different
methods. 19 Therefore, the confidence-oracle error and the AUCO will be used in the following
for this purpose.
    Notice that, using q-quantiles, each uncertainty-imposed ranking that does not change
the specific quantile each prediction belongs to, even if it does change the relative position of
the q predictions inside each quantile, is equivalent from the point of view of the confidence
curve, the confidence-oracle error and the AUCO. Hence it follows that these are all affected
by the choice of q. In the following, we will use percentiles as commonly reported in the
literature.


Error Drop As an additional quantitative measure of confidence curve quality that does
not depend on the oracle, we introduce the Error Drop. This is defined as the error ratio
   iii
       The Confidence-Oracle error has been called Sparsification Error in the context of optical flow estimation
in computer vision. 19 The AUCO has been called Area Under the Sparsification Error curve in the same
context. 19


                                                           20
between the first and last quantiles, which should correspond to the curve’s maximum and
minimum, respectively, if the confidence curve behaves correctly:

                                                    (i)
                                                   h1
                                 Error Drop h(i) = (i)
                                                
                                                                                          (7)
                                                  hq−1

   This index measures the relative performance improvement of the model obtainable by
considering only the most confident predictions instead of the entire dataset. Being a ratio,
we can use it to directly compare different methods.


Decreasing coefficient A limitation of the AUCO and Error Drop indices is that they
do not take into account the monotonicity of the confidence curve. We observe that in
existing evaluations this property is usually qualitatively considered but not quantitatively
measured, and therefore we introduce a Decrease Ratio to capture it. Given a confidence
                                 
              (i)  (i)        (i)
curve h(i) = h1 , h2 , . . . hq−1 :

                                     n               o
                                       (i)  (i)  (i)
                                      hj | hj ≥ hj+1
               Decr. Ratio h(i) =
                               
                                                            ∀j ∈ 1, . . . , q − 1         (8)
                                            q−1

where Decr. Ratio = 1 corresponds to a perfectly non-increasing curve.
   Rather than being a measure of uncertainty quality by its own, this coefficient captures
the noise in the confidence curve and should be used in combination with the other metrics
for a more comprehensive analysis.


Uncertainty Calibration

One limitation of the evaluation methods introduced up to now is that they are all order-
based, and therefore they only take into account the ranking imposed by uncertainty esti-
mates and true errors. While this is crucial to distinguish among various degrees of model
confidence, it does not take into consideration the actual values expressed by uncertainty.
   Indeed, another important aspect of uncertainty is more strictly related to the actual

                                             21
values it expresses, and referred to as calibration. In general, calibration of a model refers
to the property of outputting probability distributions which are consistent with observed
empirical frequencies.
       Calibration evaluation of neural networks gained interest in the last two years, since
it has been shown that modern neural networks, while being more accurate on one side,
are less calibrated on the other, 18 thus encouraging more research on the topic. 6,12 Indeed,
model calibration is orthogonal with respect to model accuracy. 12 Calibrated confidence is
important for model interpretability and to establish trustworthiness with the user, 18 since
it allows providing uncertainty estimates which are informative not only relatively to other
estimates, but also on their own with respect to model’s predictions.
       Model calibration can be easily defined in the classification setting, since, given an input
x, an output H (x) and a vector confidence h over the set of classes C, the model is considered
perfectly calibrated when the following holds:


                                  p (H (x) = c | hc = p̃) = p̃,   ∀p̃ ∈ [0, 1]                 (9)


where hc is the confidence associated to the class c ∈ C. This means that the confidence
assigned to each class is consistent with the probability of a prediction of belonging to that
specific class.
       In practice, over a finite number of samples, calibration can be captured by a Calibration
Plot, 6 also called Reliability Diagram. 18 To obtain such a plot the model predictions for all
samples and classes in the test set are split into K bins iv in the range [0, 1] and the frequency
of correctly predicted labels for each bin is plotted. 43 Perfect calibration corresponds to a
diagonal line.
       Calibration can vary within the same uncertainty estimator when considering different
uncertainty intervals. This could happen, for example, if a model has well-calibrated low
uncertainty but ill-calibrated high uncertainty, or vice-versa. Such cases are highlighted by
  iv
       Each bin is a subset of predictions.


                                                      22
a Calibration Plot which diverges from the diagonal line in some specific confidence intervals
but not in others.


Calibration in regression Uncertainty calibration is a well-studied topic in the context
of classification, both in its traditional domain of weather forecasting 44 and, more recently,
in deep learning. 18 However, calibration for regression appears to be less investigated, and
different solutions to evaluate it have been employed and discussed only recently. 6,17,21,22
Focusing on molecular property prediction, calibration for regression becomes crucial to
account for scalar properties like formation enthalpies or energies. In the following, we will
consider two different definitions which extend calibration in a regression setting: confidence-
intervals based and error based calibration.


   • Confidence-based calibration (also called interval-based calibration) 17,21 interprets
      each prediction and its uncertainty as the mean and the variance of a Gaussian distri-
      bution p (y | x) = N (µ (x) , σ 2 (x)), respectively, and we are interested in evaluating
      the confidence intervals thus defined. To do so, we consider symmetric intervals of
      varying confidence around the mean and compare them to the empirical probabilities
      of belonging to each interval. In a well-calibrated model, the x% of the predictions
      should fall in the x% confidence interval. In practice, we discretize the confidence
      intervals and calculate the fraction of predictions falling in each interval. This allows
      obtaining a Calibration Plot in the [0, 1] range, as in the classification case, where
      perfect calibration corresponds to a diagonal line.

   • Error-based calibration, originally described by Levi et al. 22 , proposes to directly
      compare the uncertainty to the empirical error, as in Eq. (10).



                              E (µ (x) − y)2 | σ 2 (x) = σ̃ = σ̃,
                                                          
                                                                    ∀σ̃                    (10)


      This defines a perfectly calibrated model as one outputting an uncertainty matching

                                               23
         the expected error. As in the classification case, in practice, to assess calibration it is
         necessary to split the test data ordered by estimated uncertainty in K bins and average
         uncertainties and errors for each bin. It is then possible to define the Calibration
         Curve by plotting the MSE of the i-th bin as a function of its average uncertainty v .
         Notice that, unlike classification and confidence-interval calibration cases, here the
         Calibration Plot is not bound in the [0, 1] interval but ranges between 0 and the
         maximum uncertainty. As in the other cases, perfect calibration corresponds to a
         diagonal line.


       Each of these two approaches has its pros and cons. Confidence-based calibration has
the advantage of considering all the predictions to compute each point of the plot, thus
resulting in more robust empirical calculations. However, as recently highlighted, 22 one can
re-calibrate practically any output distribution using this evaluation method — even an en-
tirely uncorrelated uncertainty. While this is not a limitation for the present work, since we
do not address uncertainty re-calibration, it is something to be taken into consideration in
general. The main advantage of error-based calibration is that it directly ties computed un-
certainty to expected error, thus reflecting what the user would expect. The main limitation
is represented by the fact that, since only a fraction of uncertainty estimates contributes
to each computed point, and the uncertainty estimates are not uniformly distributed, the
subsets used to compute the different points are not homogeneous.
       Independently from which method is used to form a Calibration Plot, it is then possible
to define some metrics over it to quantify calibration performance, as discussed in the next
paragraphs.


Calibration Error Curve and AUCE We can evaluate uncertainty calibration by com-
puting the absolute difference of the Calibration Plot with respect to perfect calibration,
thus obtaining the Calibration Error Curve. This difference can be quantified by considering
   v
    In the original definition proposed in Levi et al. 22 , the RMSE and the predicted standard deviations are
used instead of MSE and variances. We use the latter for consistency with the other measures introduced.


                                                     24
the area under this curve, which has been referred to as the Area Under the Calibration Er-
ror Curve, AUCE metric. 17 This is a cumulative metric accounting for the total calibration
error.


ECE, MCE and ENCE Rather than considering the total error, it is possible to define
the Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and the Maximum Calibration Error (MCE) as follows
(for the simpler binary classification case): 18,45

                                        K
                                        X
                               ECE =             p (i) · kacc (bi ) − conf (bi )k
                                           i=1                                            (11)
                                       K
                           M CE = max (p (i) · kacc (bi ) − conf (bi )k)
                                      i=1


where bi is the i-th bin, p (i) is the fraction of predictions that fall into the bin, acc and
conf are the accuracy (i.e., the fraction of times a class is correctly predicted) and the
average confidence for the bin. ECE and MCE correspond to the average and the maximum
over the Calibration Error Curve, respectively, weighted by the fraction of predictions which
contribute to each bin. MCE is especially important in high-risk applications, since it models
the worst-case scenario. 18
   This definition can be extended for regression. For confidence-intervals based calibration
we can compare the prediction accuracy (i.e. the fraction of times a prediction falls into
the confidence interval) to the confidence. In this case p (i) = K1 since all the predictions
contribute to all the bins. For error-based calibration acc and conf are substituted by the
RMSE and the root mean uncertainty, respectively, and this discrepancy is further normal-
ized by the uncertainty over the bin, since the error is expected to be naturally higher as the
uncertainty increases, 22 thus defining the Expected Normalized Calibration Error (ENCE).




                                                     25
Sharpness and dispersion

Calibration by itself could be insufficient to fully evaluate an uncertainty estimator. Indeed,
if the model always outputs the same constant uncertainty which matches the empirical
accuracy over the entire distribution, we obtain a perfectly calibrated uncertainty but not a
very useful one, since it does not depend on the input data at all. This concept is captured
by sharpness, an uncertainty’s property orthogonal and complementary to calibration. 46
Originally defined in the classification settings, it intuitively refers to outputting probabilities
which are as much as possible concentrated around specific classes (for example, in a binary
setting, probabilities close to zero or to one). From another perspective, it rewards input-
dependent uncertainty estimates.
   This notion has been recently extended for regression. 21,22 Following the definition in-
troduced in Levi et al. 22 , in the following the dispersion of an uncertainty estimator is
defined as the coefficient of variation cv of its uncertainty estimates (interpreted as standard
deviations). A higher cv corresponds to more heterogeneous estimates for different inputs.
   It should be noted that, for different reasons, dispersion cannot be used as an absolute
measure to quantify the performance of a given uncertainty estimator on a given dataset.
First of all, a higher cv by itself does not necessary reflect into more accurate confidence
estimates. Secondly, the “true” dispersion depends on the dataset and could also be nat-
urally low for homogeneous datasets. Moreover, being a normalized measure, cv does not
take into consideration the absolute uncertainty values but only their dispersion around the
mean. Nonetheless, dispersion represents a useful metric to be taken into account along with
calibration when comparing different methods. In particular, we are interested in verifying
that an improvement in calibration of an uncertainty estimator with respect to another one
does not originate from a reduction in dispersion.
   To the best of our knowledge dispersion has not been taken into account before in com-
parative evaluations of deep learning uncertainty estimation frameworks 17–19,47 or in the
context of deep molecular property prediction, 7,11 thus further motivating its experimental


                                                26
evaluation in the following.


Domain shift

An important feature that should characterize a well-behaving uncertainty estimate is its
ability to correctly manage domain shifts, i.e., its performance in an out-of-domain context,
which corresponds to a test set that is markedly different to the one seen during training.
While this behavior — which implies a low variance of the model — is of first importance
for every model’s output, it becomes even more crucial for uncertainty estimates. Indeed,
it is well known that every learned model will degrade at some point on unseen samples
as they become more and more different with respect to those seen during training, but a
well-calibrated uncertainty should be able to correctly identify this “knowledge boundary”
and to assess if and to what extent the model predictions can be considered reliable. This
property is orthogonal to the other uncertainty evaluation metrics and therefore needs to be
separately evaluated.
   The importance of calibration with respect to domain shifts has been highlighted in
other contexts, 12 but its role in the chemical domain is even more prominent. Indeed,
generalization power is a requirement in key applications such as drug discovery, and the
intrinsic high variability of chemical space makes it challenging to fulfill this requirement.
Despite this prominent role, the evaluation of out-of-domain uncertainty performance in the
chemistry field appears to be absent 7 or very limited, 11 thus demanding a more extensive
analysis.
   To achieve this goal, we employ the recently introduced scaffold splitting technique. 1,2
Molecules are split into bins based on their Murcko scaffold, with each bin belonging to
only one among training, validation and test set. 1 Scaffold splitting has been successfully
used to evaluate models under the more realistic assumption of significantly diverse training
and testing distributions, thus overcoming the traditional random splitting. It has been
demonstrated to be more challenging for a model and capable of simulating the chronological


                                             27
split which characterizes real scenarios of molecular property prediction. 1 To the best of our
knowledge, scaffold splitting has never been used to evaluate out-of-domain uncertainty
estimation procedures before.
   More specifically, we are interested in re-evaluating all the already introduced metrics —
AUCO, AUCE, etc. — also in the out-of-domain context obtained through scaffold-splitting.
We will pay particular attention to out-of-domain calibration, since it can measure to what
extent a model knows what it does not know. We are interested in quantifying domain shift
uncertainty performance, i.e., the ratio between in-domain and out-of-domain metrics, also in
relation to domain shift error (the ratio between in-domain and out-of-domain error) to assess
if and to what extent error generalization and uncertainty generalization are characterized
by the same behavior.



Experiments

We first describe the target dataset, followed by a description of the experimental procedure.


Data

The formation enthalpies of 131,722 stable organic molecules composed of C, H, O, and
N atoms were used to train and test the model. These reference data were derived from
the QM9 dataset, which was calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(2df,p) level of theory with
the rigid rotor-harmonic oscillator approximation (RRHO). 48 As discussed in previous work,
these calculated enthalpies are themselves associated with significant errors, primarily due
to weaknesses of B3LYP such as the absence of long-range dispersion interaction but also
the lack of rotor or conformer corrections in the calculations. 49–52 We note that it is possible
to use a small amount of high-accuracy coupled cluster training data via a transfer learning
approach to minimize the influence of DFT errors. Interested readers are referred to the
recent work of Grambow et al. 53 In this work, we use the QM9 data as is without any


                                               28
attempt to correct its errors in order to investigate the effects of aleatoric uncertainties. The
enthalpy values used for training and testing can be found in the Supporting Information.
       We used a 80:10:10 split for training, validation, and test sets, both in the in-domain
and out-of-domain settings. Random splitting has been used for in-domain analysis, while,
as previously discussed, scaffold splitting has been used for out-of-domain analysis. In both
cases, the same split has been employed to test all the methods.


Experimental Procedure

We evaluated the uncertainty estimation techniques previously reviewed using the methods
previously introduced. Other than including diagrams, we evaluated the considered methods
quantitatively, as follows:

   • For ranking-based evaluation we use the Area Under the Confidence-Oracle error
         (AUCO) as a measure of total discrepancy with respect to the best possible rank-
         ing, the Error Drop as a measure of total error reduction for high-confident predictions
         and the Decrease Ratio to assess the monotonicity of confidence curves.

   • For confidence-based calibration we use the Area Under the Calibration Error Curve
         (AUCE ) as a measure of total discrepancy with respect to perfect calibration and the
         Maximum Calibration Error (MCE ) to account for the worst-case scenariovi .

   • For error-based calibration we use the Expected Normalized Calibration Error (ENCE )
         as a measure of the (normalized) total discrepancy with respect to perfect calibration.

   • For dispersion evaluation we use the coefficient of variation cv .

   • For domain-shift performance we evaluated and compared all the above metrics also
         in an out-of-domain setting obtained using scaffold-splitting, as previously detailed.
  vi
    We did not use Expected Calibration Error (ECE) in our tests because it does not add significant
information to AUCE for confidence-based calibration.




                                                29
        We focused on the evaluation of complete and scalable uncertainty frameworks, therefore
we compared MC-Dropout (with Concrete Dropout, as previously discussed), ensembling and
bootstrapping. As previously mentioned, these approaches have been designed to model NN-
weight uncertainties, therefore they are directly related to epistemic uncertainty estimation.
However, they have been used and described in the literature in conjunction with aleatoric
uncertainty estimation to form complete frameworks, 10,12 and this is the way we tested them
in this work. In addition to evaluating total uncertainty, we have also separately evaluated
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty for each methodology. All the different methods use the
same aleatoric approximation scheme but the way epistemic uncertainty is modeled affects
also aleatoric uncertainty results, thus resulting in different outputs (ref. Eq. (4)). This
also allows drawing conclusions about aleatoric uncertainty which do not depend on the
uncertainty model used for the NN-weights.


Implementation and experimental setting

We implemented the tested uncertainty estimation methods starting from the base model
made available in Yang et al. 1 , based on the PyTorch framework.
        We performed hyperparameter optimization using the hyperopt packagevii on the base
model and we used the same hyperparameters for all the uncertainty methods tested. The
hyperparameters are: depth size for the convolutional layer = 6, depth size for the fully
connected layer = 2, hidden size = 1000. The number of instances is 15 for ensembling and
bootstrapping and 150 for MC-Dropoutviii .
        All the results obtained are inevitably a function of the number of instances used, since
the approximation performance of all the tested methods depends on it. The number of in-
stances chosen for the experiments is in line with what has been described in the literature;
additionally, preliminary experiments varying the number of instances did not report signif-
 vii
    https://github.com/hyperopt/hyperopt
 viii
    MC-Dropout employs weight sharing between different instances and it does not require a separate
training for each one, allowing the usage of more instances in practice. Therefore, this difference in the
number of instances reflects realistic condition of use.


                                                   30
icant variations in the outcomes, except for an asymptotically smaller general improvement
in all the metrics for all the tested methods.



Results

We first detail error performance for the considered models. Next, we present results for
uncertainty estimation evaluation.


Error

Table 1 lists the mean absolute error (MAE) for the considered models both in the in-domain
and out-of-domain settings.

Table 1: Mean absolute error (MAE) on the test dataset (kcal/mol). Results are shown
for the base model without any uncertainty estimation and for the model extended with
each of the evaluated uncertainty estimation methods. Both in-domain and out-of-domain
performance are reported for each case.

                                        In domain      Out domain
                          Base model    1.04           1.77
                          MC-Dropout    0.97           1.49
                          Ensembling    0.74           1.21
                          Bootstrapping 0.89           1.43


   The baseline is the chemprop model 1 without any uncertainty estimation. We notice
how extending it to include uncertainty always leads to reductions in MAE, regardless of
the approximation method used (MC-Dropout, ensembling and bootstrapping). These im-
provements, often underestimated, are due to both aleatoric and epistemic estimation in
the model. Indeed, modelling aleatoric uncertainty implicitly reduces the impact of noisy
training samples, thus improving predictive performance. Modelling epistemic uncertainty
allows averaging multiple weight configurations, avoiding overfitting, and overconfident esti-
mations, with a positive impact on predictions. These two contributions can independently
reduce the overall MAE but act synergistically when both are modeled. We can notice that,


                                                 31
independently from the model, the reduction in out-of-domain error is higher than in-domain
error.
   The analysis of improvements in MAE is not the main goal of the present paper, but its
assessment is useful for the following discussion and should be kept in consideration as an
important by-product of Bayesian uncertainty modelling.


Uncertainty estimation

Ranking-based evaluation

The confidence curves for the different methods and the related Confidence-Oracle errors are
shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, respectively. The derived AUCO and Decrease Ratio metrics
for each case are reported in the first two lines of Table 2.
   We can observe that all the curves are mostly decreasing, therefore each method can
establish a qualitatively meaningful ranking of the predictions by their uncertainty. However,
as also highlighted by the Decrease Ratio, MC-Dropout does not lead to perfectly non-
increasing curves, especially for epistemic uncertainty and at high percentiles.
   In absolute terms, ensembling allows reaching the lowest MAE in the highest percentiles
in both the components and the total uncertainty. Interestingly, the epistemic uncertainty
estimated by bootstrapping allows reaching a MAE comparable to ensembling in the highest
percentiles (0.21 versus 0.19 kcal/mol in the top 5%), even if the initial MAE on the whole
dataset is significantly worse (0.89 versus 0.74 kcal/mol). This is quantitatively measured
by a higher or similar error drop of bootstrapping, despite the overall higher MAE.
   To compare the relative performance of the different approaches we need to consider
the Confidence-Oracle errors and the AUCO. Globally, ensembling results in the lowest
errors, even if the epistemic uncertainty estimated by bootstrapping leads to comparable
performance. In contrast, the aleatoric component of bootstrapping leads to a significantly
worse performance than ensembling. MC-Dropout results in larger errors with respect to
the other considered approaches, in particular for epistemic uncertainty.

                                              32
        The total uncertainty does not always result in a lower (i.e., better) AUCO than the two
separate contributions. While this is true for ensembling, it is not true in the other cases.
In general, in ranking-based evaluation, if σa  σe or vice-versa, the total uncertainty curve
will approximate the dominant contribution. Anyway, as we can observe, in these cases the
total uncertainty appears to approximate the best performing one in terms of AUCO.

                          MC-Dropout                                                                     Ensembling                                            Bootstrapping
      1.0

      0.8

      0.6
MAE                                                                                 MAE                                                       MAE
      0.4
                Epistemic
      0.2       Aleatoric
                Total
                Best (oracle)
      0.0
            0   20         40       60                                   80   100     0        20        40        60         80        100     0        20     40      60     80   100
                            Percentile                                                                   Percentile                                             Percentile

       Figure 5: Confidence curves for the different methods (in-domain). MAE in kcal/mol.


                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                   MC Dropout (epistemic)
                                                                                                                                   MC Dropout (aleatoric)
                                                                   0.5                                                             Ensembling (epistemic)
                                                                                                                                   Ensembling (aleatoric)




                                         Confidence-oracle error
                                                                   0.4                                                             Bootstrapping (epistemic)
                                                                                                                                   Bootstrapping (aleatoric)
                                                                   0.3

                                                                   0.2

                                                                   0.1

                                                                   0.0
                                                                         0    20          40        60        80        100
                                                                                          Percentile

Figure 6: Confidence-Oracle errors for the different methods (in-domain). Error in kcal/mol.



Calibration and dispersion

Confidence-based calibration The confidence-based calibration plots are shown in Fig.
7. The derived AUCE and MCE metrics are reported in lines three and four of Table 2,
respectively.


                                                                                                          33
   Results for epistemic uncertainty vary. Ensembling is characterized by calibrated em-
pirical coverages in the low probability range (p < 50%), but increasingly underestimated
coverages in the high probability range. Bootstrapping has a similar pattern but is better
calibrated overall, with a broader interval of calibrated empirical coverages (p < 75%) and
less underestimated coverages for higher values. This is quantified by the AUCE, which
captures the overall behavior and is halved for bootstrapping with respect to ensembling.
MC-Dropout epistemic uncertainty is largely underestimated.
   In general, aleatoric uncertainty appears to be underestimated, independently from the
underlying uncertainty model of the NN weights. The possible reasons for a miscalibrated
aleatoric uncertainty are discussed in the last section.
   Total uncertainty does not result in significant improvements to AUCE compared to
considering epistemic uncertainty only in any of the cases, leading instead to slightly worse
performance for ensembling and bootstrapping. By contrast, MCE is improved in those cases
due to the combination of an underestimated aleatoric uncertainty and an overestimated
epistemic uncertainty, which results in more stable curves. This also highlights the need of
multiple metrics to quantify calibration.


Error-based calibration The error-based calibration plots are shown in Fig. 8. The
derived ENCE is also reported in line five of Table 2.
   These plots offer a complementary view of uncertainty performance with respect to the
confidence-based plots already shown. Indeed, rather than considering all the predictions at
the same time, each dot only represents a subset of predictions in direct relation with the
average error.
   Aleatoric uncertainty on its own significantly underestimates the error in all the cases.
Epistemic uncertainty appears to be a better error approximator for ensembling and boot-
strapping, with a lead of the latter (64.7 vs 30.5 AUCE), but not for MC-Dropout. Total
uncertainty always reports a better AUCE than the two individual contributions. Uncer-



                                              34
tainty tends to be underestimated in all of the considered cases.
                       Compared to confidence-based calibration, this kind of plot is less stable, especially for
high values of σ. This is due to i) the fact that the error is expected to be naturally higher
as uncertainty increases (a property already taken into account in the ENCE computation)
and ii) the fact that high uncertainty values are more sparse. Overall, error-based calibration
confirms the main results of confidence-based calibration: bootstrapping estimates appear
to be better calibrated and the total uncertainty is a better error approximator.
                       Interestingly, we notice that all the plots, independently from their distance to the di-
agonal line, are characterized by strongly correlated patterns (correlation ≈ 0.90 ∼ 0.93 for
ensembling and bootstrapping, ≈ 0.66 ∼ 0.87 for MC-Dropout).


Dispersion The dispersion coefficient is reported in the last line of Table 2. Results show
no significant variations between the different methods, except for a slightly higher cv for
MC-Dropout epistemic estimates. In general, epistemic uncertainty appears to be more
disperse than aleatoric uncertainty for all the considered methods.

                                         MC-Dropout                                              Ensembling                                             Bootstrapping
                     1.0
                              Epistemic
                              Aleatoric
                     0.8      Total
                              Perfect calibration




Empirical coverage                                                    Empirical coverage                                     Empirical coverage
                     0.6

                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0
                        0.0   0.2        0.4        0.6   0.8   1.0              0.0       0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0              0.0       0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0
                                               p                                                       p                                                      p

Figure 7: Confidence-based calibration for the different methods (in-domain).
The empirical coverage is reported for each symmetric confidence interval of probability p
defined by the uncertainty. The empirical coverage is the fraction of times the true value
actually falls in a confidence interval.




                                                                                                  35
                                            Epistemic               Aleatoric                Total
                                    4
                                    3
               MC-Dropout     MSE   2                         MSE                    MSE
                                    1
                                            ENCE=4001.6             ENCE=416.5             ENCE=394.7
                                    0
                                               ( 2)                    ( 2)                   ( 2)
                                    4
                                    3
                Ensembling    MSE   2                         MSE                    MSE
                                    1
                                            ENCE=64.7               ENCE=291.4             ENCE=34.0
                                    0
                                               ( 2)                    ( 2)                   ( 2)
                                    4
                                    3
              Bootstrapping   MSE   2                         MSE                    MSE
                                    1
                                            ENCE=30.5               ENCE=554.6             ENCE=24.8
                                    0
                                        0       2         4     0       2        4     0       2        4
                                               ( 2)                    ( 2)                   ( 2)

Figure 8: Error-based calibration for the different methods (in-domain). MSE in (kcal/mol)2 .




             Table 2: Summary metrics for the different methods (in-domain).

                       MC-Dropout          Ensembling       Bootstrapping
                    Epi.   Ale. Tot. Epi. Ale. Tot. Epi. Ale. Tot.
       AUCO        46.72 31.55 31.72 18.79 20.83 17.03 19.18 25.08 19.05
     Error drop     1.67  2.55 2.62 6.72 4.93 7.40 6.85 5.23 6.85
     Decr. Ratio    0.95  0.98 0.96    1.0    0.99    1.0 1.0    1.0    1.0
       AUCE        44.79 29.44 28.74 2.62 19.90 3.62 1.36 31.31 1.69
       MCE          0.85  0.50 0.48 0.087 0.33 0.061 0.051 0.53 0.044
       ENCE        4001.6 416.5 394.7 64.7 291.4 34.0 30.5 554.6 24.8
         cv         0.97  0.50 0.49 0.74 0.51 0.67 0.74 0.45 0.71




                                                              36
Out-of-domain uncertainty

The same plots already discussed for random splitting are shown for the out-of-domain case.
The derived metrics are summarized in Table 3. In the following, the main differences with
respect to random splitting are highlighted.
   Confidence curves and Confidence-Oracle errors for the out-of-domain case are reported
in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, respectively. In absolute terms, as expected all the related out-of-
domain indices (AUCO, error drop and decrease ratio) have deteriorated with respect to
in-domain indices for all the considered methods. The relative performance of MC-Dropout
with respect to ensembling and bootstrapping are comparable, with these last two outper-
forming the first. The relative comparison between ensembling and bootstrapping results
in qualitatively similar trends but quantitative differences which turn out to be strongly
reduced. Ensembling has the lowest AUCO for both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty,
bootstrapping has comparably low scores and it also has comparably or higher error drops.
The results for these two methods turn out to be more similar than in the in-domain setting.
In general, the ranking-based evaluation in the out-of-domain setting does not highlight
drastic changes other than an expected worsening of all the indices for all the methods.
   The calibration-confidence analysis (Fig. 11 and Fig. 12) highlights a drastic change with
respect to in-domain results for epistemic estimates using ensembling and bootstrapping. In
particular, while in-domain empirical coverages tend to be calibrated or slightly overesti-
mated, except for high p, out-of-domain empirical coverages tend to be always underesti-
mated. This means that, on average, uncertainty estimates in an out-of-domain setting are
lower than they should, while in-domain uncertainty estimates appear to be more calibrated
or slightly higher than they should. Aleatoric estimates are less affected than epistemic ones
in terms of AUCE and MCE for all the considered methods. Calibration-error analysis con-
firms the underestimation trend of out-of-domain epistemic estimates, particulary affecting
high-error predictions. The impact of out-of-domain uncertainty underestimation is further
discussed in the next section.


                                               37
        Overall, bootstrapping has a slight advantage over ensembling in terms of AUCE, MCE
and ENCE driven both by better epistemic uncertainty estimates (even if the magnitude
of the difference is less than in-domain) and also better aleatoric uncertainty estimates (in
contrast to in-domain results). This highlights another difference with respect to in-domain
analysis, that is further discussed in the next section.
        An additional difference pointed out by calibration analysis concerns the total uncer-
tainty. While in-domain total uncertainty turns out to be similar or slightly worse than the
two individual components, out-of-domain total calibration appears to be better than the
two individual components for all the considered metrics.
        In terms of dispersion, we observe a global increase for all the methods and uncertainty
types.

                             MC-Dropout                           Ensembling                         Bootstrapping
      1.6
      1.4
      1.2
      1.0

MAE   0.8                                              MAE                                MAE
      0.6
      0.4          Epistemic
                   Aleatoric
      0.2          Total
                   Best (oracle)
      0.0
            0      20         40       60   80   100     0   20   40      60   80   100     0   20    40      60     80   100
                               Percentile                         Percentile                          Percentile

Figure 9: Confidence curves for the different methods (out-of-domain). MAE in kcal/mol.


                        Table 3: Summary metrics for the different methods (out-of-domain).

                                           MC-Dropout         Ensembling      Bootstrapping
                                       Epi.    Ale. Tot. Epi. Ale. Tot. Epi. Ale. Tot.
                  AUCO                 73.35 52.29 52.93 34.12 38.68 33.38 36.27 40.05 35.81
                Error drop             1.64    1.67 1.75 3.02 2.02 2.88 2.91 3.18 2.86
                Decr. Ratio            0.86    0.90 0.91 0.99 0.95 0.98 0.98 0.99         1.0
                  AUCE                 47.36 37.13 36.70 10.18 32.81 8.10 9.62 32.57 7.50
                  MCE                  0.92    0.65 0.64 0.16 0.56 0.13 0.14 0.55 0.11
                  ENCE                13936.2 707.5 687.2 78.2 480.4 61.2 65.1 429.9 50.9
                    cv                 1.63    0.76 0.75 0.65 0.84 0.65 0.81 0.71 0.79



                                                                   38
                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                                                                                        MC Dropout (epistemic)
                                                                                                                                                                        MC Dropout (aleatoric)
                                                                                    1.0                                                                                 Ensembling (epistemic)
                                                                                                                                                                        Ensembling (aleatoric)




                                                          Confidence-oracle error
                                                                                    0.8                                                                                 Bootstrapping (epistemic)
                                                                                                                                                                        Bootstrapping (aleatoric)
                                                                                    0.6

                                                                                    0.4

                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                          0     20                         40         60         80         100
                                                                                                                           Percentile

Figure 10: Confidence-Oracle errors for the different methods (out-of-domain). Error in
kcal/mol.




                                         MC-Dropout                                                                                        Ensembling                                                         Bootstrapping
                     1.0
                              Epistemic
                              Aleatoric
                     0.8      Total
                              Perfect calibration




Empirical coverage                                                                                    Empirical coverage                                                           Empirical coverage
                     0.6

                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0
                        0.0   0.2        0.4        0.6                                   0.8   1.0              0.0            0.2        0.4        0.6         0.8        1.0              0.0       0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0
                                               p                                                                                                  p                                                                 p

Figure 11: Confidence-based calibration for the different methods (out-of-domain).
The empirical coverage is reported for each symmetric confidence interval of probability p
defined by the uncertainty. The empirical coverage is the fraction of times the true value
actually falls in a confidence interval.




                                                                                                                                            39
                                            Epistemic                Aleatoric                Total
                                   6

                                   4
              MC-Dropout     MSE                              MSE                    MSE
                                   2

                                   0       ENCE=13936.9             ENCE=707.5             ENCE=687.2
                                                 ( 2)                     ( 2)                   ( 2)
                                   6

                                   4
              Ensembling     MSE                              MSE                    MSE
                                   2

                                   0       ENCE=78.2                ENCE=480.4             ENCE=61.2
                                                 ( 2)                     ( 2)                   ( 2)
                                   6

                                   4
             Bootstrapping   MSE                              MSE                    MSE
                                   2

                                   0       ENCE=65.1                ENCE=429.9             ENCE=50.9
                                       0     2      4     6     0     2      4   6     0     2      4   6
                                                 ( 2)                     ( 2)                   ( 2)

Figure 12: Error-based calibration for the different methods (out-of-domain). MSE in
(kcal/mol)2 .




                                                              40
Discussion

The goal of this section is to analyze and discuss the results presented in previous section,
focusing on conclusions that can be drawn by comparing and integrating outcomes related
to different uncertainty models and evaluation metrics.
   Results show that ensembling and bootstrapping consistently outperform MC-Dropout
both in the in-domain and out-of-domain scenarios for all the considered metrics. This is
in line with results already presented for image classification/regression 12,47 and optical flow
estimation, 17,19 confirming this trend also for GCNN-based molecular property prediction.
In contrast to previous comparisons, that used the “base” version of MC-Dropout, 12,17,19 we
employed Concrete MC-Dropout that was independently proven superior to standard MC-
Dropout 20,38 but has not been directly compared to ensembling and bootstrapping before.
   The comparison between ensembling and bootstrapping requires a deeper analysis and
raises multiple interesting observations. On the one side, ensembling has an advantage for
total MAE, AUCO and aleatoric calibration, especially in the in-domain setting. On the
other, bootstrapping often leads to higher error drops (i.e. it allows reducing the MAE more
in proportion when we consider small percentages of high-confidence predictions), has an
advantage for better epistemic calibration in the in-domain setting and is characterized by
an overall better calibration in the out-of-domain setting. This behavior can be explained
by considering the effects of substituting each training dataset with a bootstrap sample.
Each network only sees a fraction of the starting training dataset, thus increasing individual
and ensembled MAE. Since aleatoric uncertainty is estimated from data, it follows a trend
similar to MAE and it degrades. However, bootstrapping promotes diversity in ensembled
models, which is key for epistemic uncertainty estimation, thus improving its calibration.
We can argue that as training size increases — as long as the target molecular space is kept
unchanged — bootstrapping becomes more advantageous, because each bootstrap sample
becomes a better approximator of the underlying distribution, thus avoiding losses in MAE
and aleatoric calibration in each single instance and in the ensembled model, but keeping

                                               41
an advantage as for epistemic calibration. Moreover, as we have observed, bootstrapping
becomes globally more calibrated than ensembling in the out-of-domain setting. This can be
explained by a gain of generalization power given by the additional diversity of bootstrapping.
Interestingly, this generalization power especially translates in calibration performance, and
only to a lesser extent in ranking-based indices and total MAE, which turn out to be relatively
improved in the out-of-domain setting with respect to ensembling, but not better than the
latter in absolute terms. Dispersion analysis allows checking that improvements in calibration
are not the result of losses in uncertainty heterogeneity.
   In previous studies for CNN-based image regression/classification, bootstrapping did not
report significant improvements over ensembling. 12 We can speculate that this difference is
due to i) the peculiarities of the chemical space, characterized by a larger intrinsic vari-
ability that can be exploited by bootstrapping, and ii) by variations in the training size, as
previously discussed. Results obtained for bootstrapping justify its recent use in active learn-
ing methodologies for molecular property prediction, 35 where model uncertainty (epistemic
uncertainty) and generalization power are required.
   Even if the methods investigated in this work jointly model aleatoric and epistemic un-
certainties, their separate evaluation carried out in the previous section allows directly com-
paring the two. Both appear to be effective for ranking-based evaluation, with a potential
complementary improvement of total uncertainty. From a calibration point of view, good
performance has been reached using epistemic uncertainty alone, while aleatoric uncertainty
individually turns out to always be largely underestimated, even if it is characterized by a
high correlation with error. In any case, total uncertainty is as calibrated as the individual
components, and even more calibrated in the out-of-domain setting. We can explain this
behavior of calibration as follows.
   Aleatoric uncertainty should correlate with the noise in the observed variable, while
epistemic uncertainty with the error in the trained function. However, the only observable
error (MSE) includes both these contributions. Therefore, we can speculate that in this


                                              42
specific case epistemic uncertainty appears to be more calibrated than aleatoric uncertainty
individually because the total error is primarily due to the model’s approximating function
rather than the noise in the data. In other contexts, the individual contributions to total
error could vary, and the situation could be reversed, but MSE should always be better
approximated by total uncertainty. Evaluating the individual contributions can be helpful
in pinpointing their relative importance in different settings. Moreover, even if MSE is better
approximated by total uncertainty, applications could require taking into account only one
of the two components for its specific meaning or to maximize some specific metric. This
kind of analysis is not the main goal of this work and deserves further investigation.
   Domain shift analysis is characterized by mixed results. On the one side, ranking-based
performance does not appear to be particularly affected by out-of-domain molecules: the
AUCO decreases proportionally to the (inevitable) decrease in total MAE, while the error
drop is even larger than in the in-domain setting. On the other side, calibration performance
drastically changes and out-of-domain calibration appears to be consistently underestimated.
The latter result is in line with what has been recently observed in Li et al. 35 , but the analysis
carried out in this work has allowed the quantification of this behavior and its confirmation
in a more general setting with multiple uncertainty methods being employed. As the model
is tested on molecules different with respect to those seen during training, the error increases
without the uncertainty being able to totally capture this rise, thus leading to lower than
expected estimates in this case. Out-of-domain uncertainty calibration should be a major
focus of future development in uncertainty estimation methodologies for molecular property
prediction.
   Up to now, we mainly compared uncertainty models. However, the obtained results
also allow for the comparison of different evaluation methods in terms of what they capture
about uncertainty to discuss if and to what degree they are all necessary and complemen-
tary. Taking into consideration calibration allows identifying several patterns that do not
emerge from confidence curves only, such as the discrepancy in ensembling epistemic and


                                                43
aleatoric uncertainties or some differences between ensembling and bootstrapping, thus high-
lighting its important role in comparisons. By contrast, even recent work that seeks to obtain
“uncertainty-calibrated prediction of molecular properties” 7 do not take into consideration
calibration evaluation in the results. The discrepancy between results obtained based on the
two different definitions of calibration is more subtle. Qualitatively, the main conclusions
derived by confidence-based calibration, such as the largely underestimated aleatoric uncer-
tainty in all the experiments, are also reflected in error-based calibration. Quantitatively,
the ratios of the indices obtained through these two methods do not always overlap, but
they always rank models in the same order. Based on the obtained results, it is not possible
to state if and when quantitative indices based on one of the two definitions outperform the
other. The results obtained for these two different definitions of calibration also confirm their
previous comparative discussion. In particular, even if error-based calibration directly relates
error and uncertainty according to the definition, the inherent non-uniformity of uncertainty
estimates makes it difficult to obtain reliable statistics in some uncertainty ranges (high un-
certainty ranges in our experiments), with less stable results. This also prevents assessing if
the error in these ranges is due to uncertainty estimates themselves or to insufficient data
for computing reliable statistics. Therefore, we can conclude that the choice between these
two evaluation techniques depends on the context. If the dataset is large enough to enable
meaningful estimates for all the bins, error-based calibration should be preferred because it
allows for a more direct comparison and it avoids issues when re-calibration techniques are
employed. 22 Instead, if the uncertainty distribution is highly skewed and few samples are
available in some ranges, as it turns out in our experiments, confidence-based calibration
can overcome this and results in less noisy plots.




                                               44
Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we compared three state-of-the-art approaches for uncertainty estimation in
neural networks in the context of GCNNs for molecular property prediction: MC-Dropout
with Concrete Dropout, ensembling, and bootstrapping. We selected those approximate
Bayesian inference techniques satisfying some specific application-oriented criteria: scalabil-
ity, lack of hyper-parameters, and independence from the underlying network architecture.
These techniques have been first reviewed in a unified framework that separates aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty, also in the light of recent interpretations given to ensembling,
and then experimentally compared on the QM9 dataset based on a set of introduced crite-
ria. Those criteria have been selected to evaluate uncertainty from different perspectives:
based on its ability to define a ranking of most confident predictions, based on uncertainty
calibration (two different recent definitions for regression have been employed), based on
dispersion that measures estimated heterogeneity, and based on robustness to domain shift
in the test set with respect to the training set, with scaffold splitting being employed.
   The obtained results lead to multiple interesting conclusions. First of all, ensembling
and bootstrapping appear to consistently outperform MC-Dropout, confirming the results
recently presented for other domains and different network types also for GCNN-based molec-
ular property prediction. The comparison between ensembling and bootstrapping leads to
more mixed results. Even though ensembling is better with respect to most of the con-
sidered metrics, including overall MAE, bootstrapping appears to outperform ensembling
for others, notably epistemic uncertainty calibration and overall out-of-domain calibration.
This is not in line with what has been previously described in the context of image re-
gression/classification, highlighting an interesting property of the chemical space and/or the
chemical dataset analyzed. Furthermore, the results presented have led to a better under-
standing about the role of aleatoric/epistemic uncertainty with an interesting method based
on calibration plots to pinpoint the relative contribution of the two kinds of uncertainty to
the total error.

                                              45
   The latter is one of the directions that should be further investigated in the future, with
a deeper analysis of the uncertainty components, also in relation to the specific features of
the datasets. In addition, taking into consideration how approximate methods interfere with
their independent calculation would be of crucial importance in applications. Another impor-
tant direction concerns the improvement of uncertainty estimation methods. To accomplish
this, a promising direction — especially for epistemic and out-of-domain uncertainty — is
represented by the increase of diversity in the ensembled networks. This might not be the
result of diversity in the data, as in bootstrapping, but instead come from the model it-
self. 54,55 Balancing diversity, training data size and number of hyper-parameters appears
to be a challenging tradeoff. One of the main limitations of all the uncertainty estimation
methods is out-of-domain uncertainty calibration, and overcoming this weakness should be
a major goal of future developments in uncertainty-aware molecular property prediction.



References

 (1) Yang, K.; Swanson, K.; Jin, W.; Coley, C.; Eiden, P.; Gao, H.; Guzman-Perez, A.;
     Hopper, T.; Kelley, B.; Mathea, M.; Palmer, A.; Settels, V.; Jaakkola, T.; Jensen, K.;
     Barzilay, R. Analyzing Learned Molecular Representations for Property Prediction.
     Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2019, 59, 3370–3388.

 (2) Wu, Z.; Ramsundar, B.; Feinberg, E.; Gomes, J.; Geniesse, C.; Pappu, A. S.;
     Leswing, K.; Pande, V. MoleculeNet: a benchmark for molecular machine learning.
     Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 513–530.

 (3) Mayr, A.; Klambauer, G.; Unterthiner, T.; Steijaert, M.; Wegner, J. K.; Ceulemans, H.;
     Clevert, D.-A.; Hochreiter, S. Large-scale comparison of machine learning methods for
     drug target prediction on ChEMBL. Chemical science 2018, 9, 5441–5451.

 (4) Duvenaud, D.; Maclaurin, D.; Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Gómez-Bombarelli, R.;


                                             46
     Hirzel, T.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Adams, R. P. Convolutional Networks on Graphs for
     Learning Molecular Fingerprints. Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2. 2015; pp 2224–2232.

 (5) Gal, Y. Uncertainty in deep learning. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge, 2016.

 (6) Kendall, A.; Gal, Y. What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep Learning
     for Computer Vision? Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
     Information Processing Systems. 2017; pp 5580–5590.

 (7) Zhang, Y.; Lee, A. A. Bayesian semi-supervised learning for uncertainty-calibrated
     prediction of molecular properties and active learning. Chem. Sci. 2019, 10, 8154–
     8163.

 (8) Proppe, J.; Reiher, M. Reliable Estimation of Prediction Uncertainty for Physicochemi-
     cal Property Models. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2017, 13, 3297–3317.

 (9) Neal, R. M. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks; Springer-Verlag, 1996.

(10) Gal, Y.; Ghahramani, Z. Dropout As a Bayesian Approximation: Representing Model
     Uncertainty in Deep Learning. Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
     International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48. 2016; pp 1050–1059.

(11) Ryu, S.; Kwon, Y.; Kim, W. Y. Uncertainty quantification of molecular property pre-
     diction using Bayesian neural network models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06945 2018,

(12) Lakshminarayanan, B.; Pritzel, A.; Blundell, C. Simple and Scalable Predictive Uncer-
     tainty Estimation Using Deep Ensembles. Proceedings of the 31st International Con-
     ference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017; pp 6405–6416.

(13) Fauw, J. D. et al. Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis and referral in retinal
     disease. Nature Medicine 2018, 24, 1342–1350.



                                               47
(14) Tomašev, N. et al. A clinically applicable approach to continuous prediction of future
     acute kidney injury. Nature 2019, 572, 116–119.

(15) Duvenaud, D.; Maclaurin, D.; Adams, R. P. Early Stopping as Nonparametric Varia-
     tional Inference. Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
     gence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016. 2016; pp 1070–1077.

(16) Pearce, T.; Zaki, M.; Brintrup, A.; Neel, A. Uncertainty in neural networks: Bayesian
     ensembling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05546 2018,

(17) Gustafsson, F. K.; Danelljan, M.; Schön, T. B. Evaluating Scalable Bayesian Deep
     Learning Methods for Robust Computer Vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01620
     2019,

(18) Guo, C.; Pleiss, G.; Sun, Y.; Weinberger, K. Q. On Calibration of Modern Neural
     Networks. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning -
     Volume 70. 2017; pp 1321–1330.

(19) Ilg, E.; Cicek, O.; Galesso, S.; Klein, A.; Makansi, O.; Hutter, F.; Brox, T. Uncertainty
     estimates and multi-hypotheses networks for optical flow. Proceedings of the European
     Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). 2018; pp 652–667.

(20) Mukhoti, J.; Gal, Y. Evaluating Bayesian Deep Learning Methods for Semantic Seg-
     mentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12709 2018,

(21) Kuleshov, V.; Fenner, N.; Ermon, S. Accurate Uncertainties for Deep Learning Using
     Calibrated Regression. Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
     Learning. 2018; pp 2796–2804.

(22) Levi, D.; Gispan, L.; Giladi, N.; Fetaya, E. Evaluating and Calibrating Uncertainty
     Prediction in Regression Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11659 2019,




                                             48
(23) Coley, C. W.; Barzilay, R.; Green, W. H.; Jaakkola, T. S.; Jensen, K. F. Convolutional
     embedding of attributed molecular graphs for physical property prediction. Journal of
     chemical information and modeling 2017, 57, 1757–1772.

(24) Kendall, A.; Gal, Y.; Cipolla, R. Multi-task learning using uncertainty to weigh losses
     for scene geometry and semantics. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018; pp 7482–7491.

(25) Le, Q. V.; Smola, A. J.; Canu, S. Heteroscedastic Gaussian process regression. Pro-
     ceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning. 2005; pp 489–496.

(26) Nix, D. A.; Weigend, A. S. Estimating the mean and variance of the target probability
     distribution. Proceedings of 1994 IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks
     (ICNN’94). 1994; pp 55–60.

(27) Bishop, C. M. Mixture density networks. 1994,

(28) Choi, S.; Lee, K.; Lim, S.; Oh, S. Uncertainty-aware learning from demonstration using
     mixture density networks with sampling-free variance modeling. 2018 IEEE Interna-
     tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2018; pp 6915–6922.

(29) Kristiadi, A.; Fischer, A. Predictive Uncertainty Quantification with Compound Den-
     sity Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01080 2019,

(30) Ma, Y.-A.; Chen, T.; Fox, E. B. A Complete Recipe for Stochastic Gradient MCMC.
     Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
     Systems - Volume 2. 2015; pp 2917–2925.

(31) Zhang, R.; Li, C.; Zhang, J.; Chen, C.; Wilson, A. G. Cyclical stochastic gradient
     MCMC for Bayesian deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03932 2019,

(32) Graves, A. Practical Variational Inference for Neural Networks. Proceedings of the 24th



                                            49
     International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2011; pp 2348–
     2356.

(33) Hernández-Lobato, J. M.; Adams, R. P. Probabilistic Backpropagation for Scalable
     Learning of Bayesian Neural Networks. Proceedings of the 32Nd International Confer-
     ence on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 37. 2015; pp 1861–
     1869.

(34) Liu, Q.; Wang, D. Stein Variational Gradient Descent: A General Purpose Bayesian
     Inference Algorithm. Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural In-
     formation Processing Systems. 2016; pp 2378–2386.

(35) Li, Y.-P.; Han, K.; Grambow, C. A.; Green, W. H. Self-Evolving Machine: A Con-
     tinuously Improving Model for Molecular Thermochemistry. The Journal of Physical
     Chemistry A 2019, 123, 2142–2152.

(36) Smith, J. S.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. Less is more: Sam-
     pling chemical space with active learning. The Journal of chemical physics 2018, 148,
     241733.

(37) Peterson, A. A.; Christensen, R.; Khorshidi, A. Addressing uncertainty in atomistic
     machine learning. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2017, 19, 10978–10985.

(38) Gal, Y.; Hron, J.; Kendall, A. Concrete dropout. Proceedings of the 31st International
     Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2017; pp 3584–3593.

(39) Srivastava, N.; Hinton, G.; Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Salakhutdinov, R. Dropout:
     a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine
     Learning Research 2014, 15, 1929–1958.

(40) Dietterich, T. G. Ensemble Methods in Machine Learning. Proceedings of the First
     International Workshop on Multiple Classifier Systems. 2000; pp 1–15.


                                            50
(41) Goodfellow, I.; Bengio, Y.; Courville, A. Deep Learning; MIT Press, 2016.

(42) Mandt, S.; Hoffman, M. D.; Blei, D. M. Stochastic gradient descent as approximate
     bayesian inference. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 2017, 18, 4873–4907.

(43) Niculescu-Mizil, A.; Caruana, R. Predicting good probabilities with supervised learning.
     Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning. 2005; pp 625–
     632.

(44) DeGroot, M. H.; Fienberg, S. E. The comparison and evaluation of forecasters. Journal
     of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician) 1983, 32, 12–22.

(45) Naeini, M. P.; Cooper, G. F.; Hauskrecht, M. Obtaining Well Calibrated Probabili-
     ties Using Bayesian Binning. Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence. 2015; pp 2901–2907.

(46) Gneiting, T.; Balabdaoui, F.; Raftery, A. E. Probabilistic forecasts, calibration and
     sharpness. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology)
     2007, 69, 243–268.

(47) Beluch, W. H.; Genewein, T.; Nurnberger, A.; Kohler, J. M. The Power of Ensembles
     for Active Learning in Image Classification. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018; pp 9368–9377.

(48) Ramakrishnan, R.; Dral, P. O.; Rupp, M.; von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quantum chemistry
     structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific Data 2014, 1, 140022.

(49) Cohen, A. J.; Mori-Sánchez, P.; Yang, W. Challenges for Density Functional Theory.
     Chemical Reviews 2012, 112, 289–320.

(50) Simm, G. N.; Reiher, M. Systematic Error Estimation for Chemical Reaction Energies.
     Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2016, 12, 2762–2773.



                                             51
(51) Proppe, J.; Husch, T.; Simm, G. N.; Reiher, M. Uncertainty quantification for quantum
     chemical models of complex reaction networks. Faraday Discussions 2017, 195, 497–
     520.

(52) Li, Y.-P.; Bell, A. T.; Head-Gordon, M. Thermodynamics of Anharmonic Systems: Un-
     coupled Mode Approximations for Molecules. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
     putation 2016, 12, 2861–2870.

(53) Grambow, C. A.; Li, Y.-P.; Green, W. H. Accurate Thermochemistry with Small Data
     Sets: A Bond Additivity Correction and Transfer Learning Approach. The Journal of
     Physical Chemistry. A 2019, 123, 5826–5835.

(54) Lee, S.; Purushwalkam, S.; Cogswell, M.; Crandall, D.; Batra, D. Why M heads
     are better than one: Training a diverse ensemble of deep networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1511.06314 2015,

(55) Pearce, T.; Anastassacos, N.; Zaki, M.; Neely, A. Bayesian Inference with Anchored En-
     sembles of Neural Networks, and Application to Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1805.11324 2018,




                                            52
