J. Med. Chem. 2007, 50, 2385-2390

2385

A High-Throughput Screen for Aggregation-Based Inhibition in a Large Compound Library
Brian Y. Feng,†,§ Anton Simeonov,‡,§ Ajit Jadhav,‡ Kerim Babaoglu,† James Inglese,‡ Brian K. Shoichet,*,† and
Christopher P. Austin*,‡
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Graduate Group in Chemistry and Chemical Biology, 1700 4th Street, UniVersity of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158-2330, and NIH Chemical Genomics Center, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-3370

Downloaded via UNIV OF CALIFORNIA SAN FRANCISCO on October 31, 2018 at 19:36:31 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

ReceiVed NoVember 13, 2006

High-throughput screening (HTS) is the primary technique for new lead identification in drug discovery
and chemical biology. Unfortunately, it is susceptible to false-positive hits. One common mechanism for
such false-positives is the congregation of organic molecules into colloidal aggregates, which nonspecifically
inhibit enzymes. To both evaluate the feasibility of large-scale identification of aggregate-based inhibition
and quantify its prevalence among screening hits, we tested 70 563 molecules from the National Institutes
of Health Chemical Genomics Center (NCGC) library for detergent-sensitive inhibition. Each molecule
was screened in at least seven concentrations, such that dose-response curves were obtained for all molecules
in the library. There were 1274 inhibitors identified in total, of which 1204 were unambiguously detergentsensitive. We identified these as aggregate-based inhibitors. Thirty-one library molecules were independently
purchased and retested in secondary low-throughput experiments; 29 of these were confirmed as either
aggregators or nonaggregators, as appropriate. Finally, with the dose-response information collected for
every compound, we could examine the correlation between aggregate-based inhibition and steep doseresponse curves. Three key results emerge from this study: first, detergent-dependent identification of
aggregate-based inhibition is feasible on the large scale. Second, 95% of the actives obtained in this screen
are aggregate-based inhibitors. Third, aggregate-based inhibition is correlated with steep dose-response
curves, although not absolutely. The results of this screen are being released publicly via the PubChem
database.
Introduction
High-throughput screening (HTS) is the most widespread
technique used to identify new candidate leads for drug and
chemical probe discovery. Although screening has had notable
successes,1,2 it can also generate a crippling number of falsepositive “hits”. Lipinski’s well-known rules3 were a first step
to avoiding such misleading “hits”; subsequently, computational
filtershavebeenwidelydeployedtoflagproblematiccompounds.4-7
These filters attempt to capture artifactual causes of nonspecific
inhibition such as molecules that interfere with assay read-out,9
oxidize or chemically modify the target,9-11 or form colloidal
aggregates.12-22 In this latter mechanism, small molecules selfaggregate into a suspension of large particles that indiscriminately associate with proteins and sequester enzymes from
substrate. Recent work has suggested that aggregate-based
inhibition may explain a large number of promiscuous inhibitors,
although exactly how common they are remains unclear.
Aggregate-based inhibition has several characteristic features.
Perhaps the most exploitable of these is the sensitivity of this
inhibition to non-ionic detergents.18,20 Moderate concentrations
(0.01-0.1%) of such detergents not only disrupt aggregate
formation, but can dissociate the protein-aggregate interaction
and reverse inhibition. In earlier work, we exploited this
characteristic to design a detergent-based counter-screen for
aggregation, where detergent-sensitive, aggregate-based inhibition is isolated from detergent-resistant inhibition.12 We found
* To whom correspondence should addressed. (B.K.S.) Phone: (415)
514-4126. Fax: (415) 514-4260. E-mail: shoichet@cgl.ucsf.edu. (C.P.A.)
Phone: (301) 217-5725. Fax: (301) 217-5736. E-mail: austinc@mail.nih.gov.
† University of California San Francisco.
‡ National Institutes of Health.
§ These authors contributed equally to this work.

that this counter-screen was sufficiently reliable to evaluate
aggregation in a small, 1000-compound library. Here, we test
this method in a 1536-well format screen of 70 563 molecules
from the NCGC small-molecule library. For each molecule, a
dose-response curve encompassing 7-15 points from 3 nM
to 30 µM was calculated according to the recently described
qHTS technique.23 As explained in Inglese et al.,23 curves were
classified 1-4 according to quality, with Class 1 curves being
the highest quality fits and displaying a top and a bottom
asymptote. Class 2 curves contain a single asymptote, and Class
3 curves show significant inhibition only at the highest
concentration point. Class 4 curves are assigned to inactive
molecules. These dose-response curves also allowed us to
investigate the frequent coincidence of aggregate-based inhibition and steep dose-response curves. Curves with such high
Hill slopes are frequently a harbinger of pathological behavior,24
and we wished to understand if they were an indicator of
aggregate-based inhibition.
Here, we address the following questions: Is the detergentdependent assay for detecting aggregators robust in a lowvolume, high-throughput format? How prevalent are aggregates
in a well-curated screening library, and how common are they
as compared to other types of inhibitors? Is aggregate-based
inhibition correlated with steep dose-response? Because we
have tested every compound at no less than seven concentrations
across a large range, we anticipate that these studies will offer
useful guides to what may be expected in screening campaigns,
at least against enzyme targets.
Results
Library Composition. The NCGC library that was screened
consisted of 70 563 molecules, most of which were part of the

10.1021/jm061317y CCC: $37.00 © 2007 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 04/21/2007

2386

Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 2007, Vol. 50, No. 10

NIH Molecular Libraries Small Molecule Repository (MLSMR,
http://mlsmr.discoverypartners.com/MLSMR_HomePage/,∼59 000
molecules). Compounds from this library generally display leadlike25 or drug-like3 properties. The MLSMR was additionally
supplemented by small collections from various vendors and
non-commercial sources (see Materials and Methods).
Screening Results. After optimizing enzyme, detergent, and
substrate concentrations (see Materials and Methods), we
screened 70 563 compounds from the NCGC small-molecule
library against β-lactamase under both detergent(-) and detergent(+) conditions (Figure 1a,b). The detergent(-) screen was run
continuously in 65 h, while the detergent(+) screen was finished
in 51 h. Acceptable signal-to-noise levels were achieved in both
cases, as measured by the Z′ score, a standard metric of HTS
quality.26 The detergent(-) screen had an average Z′ of 0.77,
whereas the detergent(+) screen had an average Z′ of 0.82. For
both assays, the Z′ is well above 0.5, the standard cutoff score
for assay reliability. Kinetic data for each reaction were
collected, although for this analysis only the first and last points
were used to calculate percent inhibition (we are making the
full time courses of each reaction publicly available, as these
may be a useful source of data for further study). We considered
any molecule that displayed dose-dependent inhibition to be an
active in the detergent(-) screen. Two criteria were used to
describe detergent-sensitivity: first, each dose-response curve
was qualitatively classified (the curve class23) on the basis of
the completeness of the curve and the quality of the fit (r2).
We required the curve class of putative aggregators be more
defined (lower in curve class value) in the absence of detergent
than in its presence. For example, a molecule that has a doseresponse curve of Class 1 in the detergent(-) screen, but of
Class 4 in the detergent(+) screen, would satisfy this criterion
(Figure 1c,d). Second, the maximum inhibition observed across
the titration series had to decrease in the detergent(+) screen
relative to the detergent(-) screen. We took a significant
decrease to be 3 standard-deviation units from the mean
difference in activity upon addition of detergent for the whole
library. By these criteria, the assay results fell into four
categories: detergent-sensitive inhibition, detergent-insensitive
inhibition, inconclusive results, where only one of the criteria
for detergent-sensitive inhibition was satisfied, and compounds
for which no inhibition was observed in either assay.
Overall, 1204 molecules (1.7%) met both the inhibition and
the curve criteria and were identified as aggregation-based
inhibitors, whereas only 70 (0.1%) were identified as detergentinsensitive. These 70 included 25 known β-lactam inhibitors
or substrates of β-lactamase. Of the remaining molecules, 562
were unable to be categorized, exhibiting only one of the criteria
for detergent-sensitive inhibition (Figure 2). These consisted
mostly of molecules that exhibited marginal levels of inhibition,
and, while most did show some response to detergent, they fell
outside the range of statistical confidence. Aggregators varied
in their ability to inhibit β-lactamase, but the most potent had
IC50 values near 1 µM. The concentration-dependence of these
molecules was consistent with a colloidal mechanism of
inhibition; few aggregators were detected below 1 µM, but by
5 µM 60% of the aggregate-based inhibitors were apparent.
Secondary Assays. To test the reliability of these measurements, 31 molecules were independently purchased (i.e., resourced from the vendors) and retested in secondary assays.
These molecules, identified in the primary screen as 17
aggregators and 14 inactives, were examined in the same
β-lactamase assay, conducted in a one-at-a-time cuvette-format.
Although the conditions of these experiments were similar to

Feng et al.

Figure 1. A 3D scatter plot of qHTS data. Concentration-response
relationships for all 70 563 molecules are shown, colored as: no
relationship (black), inhibition (blue), or activation (red). Comparison
between detergent(-) (a) and detergent(+) (b) screening reveals the
presence of aggregation-based activity in the detergent(-) assay.
Example dose-response curves obtained from qHTS data for detergentresistant (c) and detergent-sensitive (d) inhibitors.

those of the primary screen, these experiments varied the
concentration of DMSO, enzyme, and detergent, as well as the
reaction volume (1 mL vs 8 µL) and path length. Of the 17
molecules identified as aggregators in the primary screen, 15
exhibited aggregate-based inhibition upon retesting in the

High-Throughput Screen for Aggregation-Based Inhibition

Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 2007, Vol. 50, No. 10 2387
Table 2. Sensitivity to Assay Conditions among “Nonaggregators”

a Extrapolated IC

Figure 2. Classification and quantification of inhibitors found in
the screen. 1204 molecules were identified as detergent-sensitive
inhibitors, based on two difference criteria between the detergent(-)
and detergent(+) conditions: deterioration in the curve class of the
molecule, and a decrease in the maximum observed inhibition across
the dilution series. Seventy molecules were detergent-insensitive
inhibitors, 68 727 showed no activity, and 562 were ambiguous, only
fulfilling one of the two criteria necessary to be identified as an
aggregation-based inhibitor.
Table 1. Results of Low-Throughput Secondary Assays
number of
aggregators relaxed screening
conditionsb

type of
molecule

number
tested

number of
aggregators stringent screening
conditionsa

primary screen
aggregator
primary screen
nonaggregator

17

15

15

14

0

10

a Primary screening conditions. b Less-stringent conditions (4-fold less
enzyme, 5-fold less stabilizing detergent).

secondary assay. Likewise, of the 14 inactive molecules retested,
none inhibited under screening conditions. However, 10 of these
exhibited aggregate-based inhibition at higher concentrations
or under relaxed assay conditions, that is, using decreased
enzyme concentration and less detergent in the detergent(-)
condition of the primary high-throughput assay (Table 1).
A curious feature of the primary screening data was that some
molecules appeared to activate β-lactamase in the detergentfree screen; this activation was eliminated on detergent addition.
Six of these putative activators were independently purchased
and retested under several conditions in low-throughput, cuvettebased assays (Table 1). In contrast to the aggregators and

50 values.

b Highest soluble concentration.

nonaggregators identified in the primary screen, activation was
not reproducible in these secondary assays. Subsequently,
another 100 of these apparent activators were re-sourced from
the vendors, and stocks were remade directly from solid powder.
These compounds were then tested under medium throughput
conditions, such as 96- or 384-well formats. Because of the
larger volume of these assays, as compared to the 1536-well
formats, it was often possible to observe the compound
immediately after addition to the assay. In these cases, we often
observed what appeared to be precipitants, typically at the
bottom of the wells at the solvent-polymer interface. Also,
when the compounds were tested at these higher volumes, much
of the former activation was attenuated, although many of these
compounds did still lead to activation. Taken together, these
results suggest that activation is a phenomenon peculiar to the
very low volume, high-throughput formats used in the primary
screen. We will not consider it further here.
Hill Slope Analysis. The dose-response information obtained
in this screen allowed us to investigate the correlation between
aggregate-based inhibition and steep dose-response curves,
which are common among high-throughput screening hits.19,24
We analyzed the Hill slopes of the highest-quality doseresponse curves, consisting of 174 aggregate-based inhibitors,
24 β-lactam-based irreversible inhibitors, and 17 reversible
inhibitors of β-lactamase (Figure 3). The reversible inhibitors
displayed standard, single-site dose response curves with slopes
near 1, whereas the β-lactam inhibitors were biased toward
somewhat steeper curves, as expected for very potent inhibitors.27,28 However, the aggregators displayed a mixed tendency: many had Hill coefficients close to 1, but many others
showed steep curves, even steeper than the covalent β-lactam
inhibitors, and similar to those seen for other aggregating
inhibitors.17 Of the 174 aggregators in this set, 70 had Hill slopes
steeper than 1.5.

2388

Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 2007, Vol. 50, No. 10

Figure 3. (a) Correlation between aggregation-based inhibitors and
those with high Hill slopes. Compared to a set of specific, reversible
β-lactamase inhibitors and a set of irreversible inhibitors, aggregators
are more likely to have steep dose-response curves. (b) Distribution
of Hill slopes among the active molecules discovered from 18 enzyme
screens currently annotated in PubChem. (c) Variation in the slopes of
high Hill slope molecules that were tested in at least two enzyme assays.
Hill slopes appear consistent for most of these molecules.

Data Sets. The full results of these screens are publicly
available through PubChem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)
and the Shoichet Lab website (http://shoichetlab.compbio.ucsf.edu/).
Discussion
Perhaps the most practical conclusion to be drawn from this
screen is that the detergent-sensitive assay can reliably identify
aggregate-based enzyme inhibitors in a genuinely highthroughput format. A counter-screen consisting of 0.01% Triton
X-100 effectively separated 1274 assay actives into 1204
aggregators and 70 molecules that act by other mechanisms

Feng et al.

(Figure 2). This assay may be used to characterize other libraries,
or may be adapted to other enzymes for direct use as a counterscreen.
Many mechanisms have been proposed to explain promiscuous inhibition, including interference in assay read-out,9 compound oxidation,10 and chemical modification of the target.9-11
A striking result of this screen is that 95% of the actives can be
attributed to a single one of these: aggregate-based inhibition.
How the remaining 5% of actives are distributed among other
mechanisms, including true specific, reversible inhibition, is
currently under investigation in our laboratory; few of these
mechanisms are as rapidly and decisively identified as promiscuous aggregation. What we can say at this point is that 25 of
these 70 actives are β-lactam-based inhibitors of β-lactamase,
which act by covalently modifying the catalytic nucleophile,
Ser64.29,30 Also, 5-10 of these appear to be aggregates that
are resistant to 0.01% Triton X-100, but are sensitive at 0.1%,
the concentration used in the original screen.12 This leaves only
about 35 molecules that act by all other mechanisms.
Although the vast majority of hits in this screen inhibited
through aggregate formation, the overall percentage of aggregators identified in the library is smaller than what we found in
an initial, smaller-scale screen. This previous study suggested
that as many as 19% of 298 randomly selected drug-like
molecules behave as aggregators at 30 µM.12 Two factors
contribute to this discrepancy. The first relates to the sensitivity
of aggregate-based inhibition to assay conditions. For reasons
of enzyme stability in the 1536-well format, a low level of
detergent (0.0001%) was present in the detergent(-) screen;
this concentration of detergent is 5-fold greater than the amount
required in the original 96-well assay.12 Additionally, the
concentration of enzyme was increased 4-fold relative to the
original assay, while the concentration of detergent used in the
detergent(+) screen was reduced 10-fold to 0.01%. These
changes reduced the number of aggregators found under
detergent(-) conditions, resulting in a more stringent screen.
Among the 31 compounds retested in low-throughput secondary
assays, the original conditions were more sensitive to aggregatebased inhibition than the new high-throughput conditions. At
least a 2-fold difference in potency was observed for most
aggregators tested under both conditions (Table 2). Finally, we
cannot discount the possibility of compound bias in our original
set of 298 rule-of-5-compliant molecules. The much larger
NCGC library not only allows for more robust statistics, but its
careful curation may have also contributed to the lower rate of
aggregate-based inhibition.
Steep dose-response curves are often harbingers of pathology
in HTS results.24 Because many aggregators also have such
curves, it is tempting to correlate the two phenomena. The qHTS
titrations allowed us to investigate this possibility. We selected
the highest quality dose-response curves, consisting of 174
aggregators, 17 previously known specific, reversible inhibitors
of β-lactamase (from our previous work with this enzyme) and
24 known specific, covalent inhibitors (Figure 3). The classical,
competitive inhibitors all had dose-response curves consistent
with single-site inhibition, with Hill coefficients near 1. In
contrast, the aggregators were biased toward steeper curves, with
an average slope of 2.2 versus an average slope of 0.7 for the
reversible inhibitors. The aggregator curves were also on average
steeper than a set of irreversible β-lactam inhibitors, which had
an average Hill slope of 1.2. The steep dose-response curves
for the β-lactams are expected, given their generally low Kd
values.27,28 Overall, 40% (70/174) of the aggregators had Hill
coefficients greater than 1.5. Also, every compound with a high

High-Throughput Screen for Aggregation-Based Inhibition

Hill slope was either an aggregator (93% of the time) or a
covalent modifier (7% of the time). Thus, increased Hill
coefficients may be reliable predictors of aggregation-based or,
less frequently, potent covalent inhibition, although these
predictions will also miss some aggregators. The high Hill slopes
of both potent covalent and aggregation-based inhibitors, and
indeed those of potent reversible inhibitors, have the same
mechanistic origin: all are stoichiometric inhibitors with very
low Kd values. For such molecules, inhibition is only observed
when the inhibitor concentration approaches that of the enzyme.
Because the latter is well above the true Kd of the inhibitor,
inhibition rises very quickly in this concentration range, leading
to steep curves. Thus, for both aggregators and certain covalent
inhibitors, high Hill slopes have nothing to do with cooperative
binding and everything to do with high enzyme-to-Kd ratios.28
A question that naturally arises is how often are the
aggregators found in this screen also found against other enzyme
screens of the MLSMR. More generally, do aggregates turn up
with the same frequency in other screens? It is difficult to answer
this question directly at this point: few of the enzyme screens
reported in PubChem test all or even most of the MLSMR
molecules; also the conditions of the screen and the definition
of “actives” differ from assay to assay (many use detergent,
for instance). However, one criterion that may be directly
compared is the Hill slopes of active molecules. As of this
writing, 18 enzyme screens with Hill slopes for each active are
available in PubChem. For these 18 screens, 6254 actives (hits)
were reported. Of these, 1452 (23%) have Hill slopes greater
than 1.5 (Figure 3b). For those high Hill slope molecules that
were tested in two or more assays, the Hill coefficient was fairly
stable, suggesting that these measurements are reliable and
transferable (Figure 3c). In the β-lactamase screen, all molecules
that had steep dose-response curves were either aggregators
(93%) or covalent modifiers (7%). If this pattern extends to the
other enzyme screens, it suggests that, despite the use of
detergents and other adjuvants, more than 20% the actives in
these screens are also aggregators. Because only about 45% of
the aggregators identified in this study had high Hill slopes,
the percentage of aggregation-based artifacts among the enzyme
screens is likely to be higher still.
Our interest in undertaking this study was to test an assay
that could quantify the presence of aggregate-based inhibitors
in a high-throughput setting. Several caveats deserve mention.
A surprising conclusion from this study is that so many of the
actives were aggregators, and so few can be attributed to other
mechanisms of inhibition. Whereas we suspect that similar
patterns might occur in other enzyme assays, this inference is
tentative, as enzymes with greater liabilities to chemical
reactivity, or indeed libraries with different compounds, may
show different patterns. Also, we note that identification of an
aggregating molecule does not disqualify that molecule from
future activity. Whereas aggregators should be flagged for future
screens, aggregation is concentration- and condition-dependent,
and a molecule that aggregates under one condition and
concentration may behave well under different conditions or
lower concentrations. More importantly, counter-screens for
aggregation should always be considered; one lesson of this
study is that such assays may be straightforward.
Perhaps the greatest liability of HTS is the occurrence of falsepositive hits, and many mechanisms have been proposed to
explain these. A key result of this study is that, at least for robust
enzymes like β-lactamase, 95% of the artifactual hits are due
to a single mechanism: colloidal aggregation followed by
enzyme sequestration. Only 5% can be attributed to all other

Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 2007, Vol. 50, No. 10 2389

mechanisms of inhibition put together, including covalent
modification, oxidation, and assay interference. For wellbehaved enzymes, the chemical reactivity mechanisms about
which the field most worries may be rare in well-curated
libraries. Instead, it may be the physical behavior of organic
molecules that most contributes to false-positive hits in screening. Certainly, assays that ignore this effect risk drowning in a
sea of artifacts. By the same coin, an encouraging aspect of
aggregation is that it is a physical phenomenon that we can
hope to understand and for which we can control. Pragmatically,
we can deploy a simple high-throughput assay to detect it; this
assay can be applied to most screening collections, in the
highest-format assays, and can do much to prioritize molecules
for follow-up experiments.
Materials and Methods
Compound Library. The 70 563-member library was collected
from several sources: 1280 pharmacologically active compounds
from LOPAC (Sigma-Aldrich), 1120 compounds from Prestwick
Chemical (Illkirch, France), 280 purified natural products from
TimTec (Newark, DE), three 1000-member combinatorial libraries
from Pharmacopeia (Princeton, NJ), 1106 compounds from Tocris
(Bristol, U.K.), 59 684 compounds from the National Institutes of
Health Molecular Libraries Small Molecule Repository (MLSMR,
http://mlsmr.discoverypartners.com/MLSMR_HomePage/), 1981
compounds from the National Cancer Institute (the NCI Diversity
Set, http://dtp.nci.nih.gov/branches/dscb/diversity_explanation.html),
148 NCGC internally generated compounds, 20 control compounds
from the Shoichet laboratory (UCSF), 96 β-peptides from the
Gellman laboratory (University of Wisconsin, Madison), 726
compounds from University of Pittsburgh Center for Chemical
Methodology and Library Development, and 1121 compounds from
Boston University Center for Chemical Methodology and Library
Development. The library was deployed as DMSO solutions (7 µL
each in 1536-well Greiner polypropylene compound plate) at initial
concentrations ranging between 2 and 10 mM. Plates were serially
diluted, and compounds were assayed at final concentrations ranging
from 4 nM to 30 µM. Plate-to-plate (vertical) dilutions and 384to-1536 compressions were performed on an Evolution P3 dispense
system equipped with a 384-tip pipetting head and two RapidStak
units (Perkin-Elmer, Wellesley, MA). Additional details on the
preparation of the compound library are provided elsewhere.23
Assay Implementation. The detergent-dependent screen was
adapted from a previously described, 96-well format assay for the
identification of promiscuous inhibitors.16 Moving to a 1536-well
format demanded changes to ensure a high signal-to-noise ratio;
both a 4-fold increase in enzyme and a 2-fold increase in substrate
concentration were required to maintain a high signal-to-noise ratio.
Also, a 5-fold increase in the concentration of Triton X-100, to
0.0001%, in the detergent(-) screen was needed to stabilize the
enzyme. Meanwhile, the Triton X-100 concentration in the detergent(+) screen was lowered from 0.1% to 0.01% to avoid excess bubble
formation. Technical adjustments to the liquid handling systems
were also necessary to deal with this problem. Finally, serial
dilutions were carried out in 5-fold intervals, resulting in DMSO
percentages of 0.3%.
β-Lactamase Assays. AmpC β-lactamase was purified and
assayed as described,17,31 unless otherwise noted. The enzyme was
present at 4 nM in a final reaction volume of 8 µL. Reactions were
conducted in 1536-well Greiner black clear bottom plates, and
liquids were handled using a solenoid-based dispenser. Compounds
and controls (23 nL) were transferred via a Kalypsys PinTool
equipped with a 1536-pin array and inline washing stations. The
plates were incubated for 15 min at room temperature (22-23 °C),
and reactions were initiated by the addition of substrate (dissolved
in buffer, final concentration 400 µM). The plates were immediately
transferred to a ViewLux (Perkin-Elmer) high-throughput CCD
imager and read every 20 s for 4 min at 480 nm. During liquid
handling, reagent bottles (AmpC, buffer, and nitrocefin solution)

2390

Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 2007, Vol. 50, No. 10

were kept submerged in a 4 °C water bath. All screening operations
were performed on a Kalypsys robotic system (Kalypsys Inc., San
Diego, CA) containing one RX-130 and two RX-90 anthropomorphic robotic arms. The absorbance difference between the last and
first time points was used to compute the reaction progress.
Cuvette-based assays (1 mL reaction volume) either replicated
the above conditions (stringent conditions) or contained 1 nM
AmpC β-lactamase, 200 µM nitrocefin, and 0.00002% Triton X-100
(relaxed conditions). Cuvette-based assays contained between 1%
and 2% DMSO. Compound and enzyme were incubated for 5 min
before the reaction was initiated by addition of substrate. Nitrocefin
hydrolysis was monitored at 482 nm on a HP8453 UV-visible
spectrophotometer.
Data Analysis. Initial curve-fitting and data analysis were
conducted as previously described.23 Briefly, concentration-effect
relationships were derived using the GeneData Screener
software package. Curves were categorized according to fit quality,
response magnitude, and degree of measured activity. Manual curve
refitting was performed using Graphpad 5.0. The results of these
screens are available through PubChem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and the Shoichet Lab website (http://shoichetlab.compbio.ucsf.edu/).

References
(1) Proudfoot, J. R. Drugs, Leads, and Drug-Likeness: An Analysis of
Some Recently Launched Drugs. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2002,
12, 1647-1650.
(2) Druker, B. J.; Lydon, N. B. Lessons Learned from the Development
of an Abl Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor for Chronic Myelogenous
Leukemia. J. Clin. InVest. 2000, 105, 3-7.
(3) Lipinski, C. A.; Lombardo, F.; Dominy, B. W.; Feeney, P. J.
Experimental and Computational Approaches to Estimate Solubility
and Permeability in Drug Discovery and Development Settings. AdV.
Drug DeliVery ReV. 1997, 23, 3-25.
(4) Rishton, G. M. Nonleadlikeness and Leadlikeness in Biochemical
Screening. DDT 2003, 8, 86-96.
(5) Oldenburg, K. High Throughput Sonication: Evaluation for Compound Solubilization. Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screening
2005, 8, 499-512.
(6) Martin, Y. C. A Bioavailability Score. J. Med. Chem. 2005, 48,
3164-3170.
(7) Roche, O.; Schneider, P.; Zuegge, J.; Guba, W.; Kansy, M.; Alanine,
A.; Bleicher, K.; Danel, F.; Gutknecht, E. M.; Rogers-evans, M.;
Neidhart, W.; Stalder, H.; Dillon, M.; Sjogren, E.; Fotouhi, N.;
Gillespie, P.; Goodnow, R.; Harris, W.; Jones, P.; Taniguchi, M.;
Tsujii, S.; Vvon Der Saal, W.; Zimmermann, G.; Schneider, G.
Development of a Virtual Screening Method for Identification of
“Frequent Hitters” in Compound Libraries. J. Med. Chem. 2002, 45,
137-142.
(8) Hopkins, A. L.; Mason, J. S.; Overington, J. P. Can We Rationally
Design Promiscuous Drugs? Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2006, 16, 127136.
(9) Walters, W. P.; Ajay, A.; Murcko, M. A. Recognizing Molecules
with Drug-Like Properties. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 1999, 3, 384387.
(10) Huth, J.; Mendoza, R.; Olejniczak, E.; Johnson, R.; Cothron, D.; Liu,
Y.; Lerner, C.; Chen, J.; Hajduk, P. Alarm NMR: A Rapid and
Robust Experimental Method to Detect Reactive False Positives in
Biochemical Screens. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 217-224.
(11) Rishton, G. M. Reactive Compounds and in Vitro False Positives in
Hts. DDT 1997, 2, 382-384.
(12) Feng, B. Y.; Shelat, A.; Doman, T. N.; Guy, R. K.; Shoichet, B. K.
High-Throughput Assays for Promiscuous Inhibitors. Nat. Chem. Biol.
2005, 1, 146-148.

Feng et al.
(13) Seidler, J.; McGovern, S. L.; Doman, T.; Shoichet, B. K. Identification
and Prediction of Promiscuous Aggregating Inhibitors among Known
Drugs. J. Med. Chem. 2003, 46, 4477-4486.
(14) Liu, H.; Wang, Z.; Regni, C.; Zou, X.; Tipton, P. A. Detailed Kinetic
Studies of an Aggregating Inhibitor; Inhibition of Phosphomannomutase/Phosphoglucomutase by Disperse Blue 56. Biochemistry 2004,
27, 8662-8669.
(15) Feng, B.; Shoichet, B. K. Synergy and Antagonism of Promiscuous
Inhibition in Multiple-Compound Mixtures. J. Med. Chem. 2006, 49,
2151-2154.
(16) Feng, B. Y.; Shoichet, B. K. A Detergent-Based Assay for the
Detection of Promiscuous Inhibitors. Nat. Protocols 2006, 1, 550553.
(17) McGovern, S. L.; Caselli, E.; Grigorieff, N.; Shoichet, B. K. A
Common Mechanism Underlying Promiscuous Inhibitors from
Virtual and High-Throughput Screening. J. Med. Chem. 2002, 45,
1712-1722.
(18) McGovern, S. L.; Helfand, B. T.; Feng, B. Y.; Shoichet, B. K. A
Specific Mechanism of Nonspecific Inhibition. J. Med. Chem. 2003,
46, 4265-4272.
(19) McGovern, S. L.; Shoichet, B. K. Kinase Inhibitors: Not Just for
Kinases Anymore. J. Med. Chem. 2003, 46, 1478-1483.
(20) Ryan, A. J.; Gray, N. M.; Lowe, P. N.; Chung, C.-w. Effect of
Detergent on “Promiscuous” Inhibitors. J. Med. Chem. 2003, 46,
3448-3451.
(21) Frenkel, Y. V.; Clark, A. D., Jr.; Das, K.; Wang, Y.-H.; Lewi, P. J.;
Janssen, P. A. J.; Arnold, E. Concentration and pH Dependent
Aggregation of Hydrophobic Drug Molecules and Relevance to Oral
Bioavailability. J. Med. Chem. 2005, 48, 1974-1983.
(22) Reddie, K. G.; Roberts, D. R.; Dore, T. M. Inhibition of Kinesin
Motor Proteins by Adociasulfate-2. J. Med. Chem. 2006, 49, 48574860.
(23) Inglese, J.; Auld, D.; Jadhav, A.; Johnson, R.; Simeonov, A.; Yasgar,
A.; W, Z.; CP, A. Quantitative High-Throughput Screening: A
Titration-Based Approach That Efficiently Identifies Biological
Activities in Large Chemical Libraries. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2006, 103, 11473-11478.
(24) Walters, W. P.; Namchuk, M. Designing Screens: How to Make
Your Hits a Hit. Nat. ReV. Drug DiscoVery 2003, 2, 259-266.
(25) Hann, M. M.; Oprea, T. I. Pursuing the Leadlikeness Concept in
Pharmaceutical Research. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2004, 8, 255263.
(26) Zhang, J.; Chung, T.; Oldenburg, K. A Simple Statistical Parameter
for Use in Evaluation and Validation of High Throughput Screening
Assays. J. Biomol. Screening 1999, 4, 67-73.
(27) Straus, O. H.; Goldstein, A. Zone Behavior of Enzymes: Illustrated
by the Effect of Dissociation Constant and Dilution on the System
Cholinesteratse-Physostigmine. J. Gen. Physiol. 1943, 26, 559-585.
(28) Shoichet, B. K. Interpreting Steep Dose-Response Curves in Early
Inhibitor Discovery. J. Med. Chem. 2006, 49, 7274-7277.
(29) Usher, K. C.; Blaszczak, L. C.; Weston, G. S.; Shoichet, B. K.;
Remington, S. J. Three-Dimensional Structure of Ampc BetaLactamase from Escherichia Coli Bound to a Transition-State
Analogue: Possible Implications for the Oxyanion Hypothesis and
for Inhibitor Design. Biochemistry 1998, 37, 16082-16090.
(30) Chen, Y.; Minasov, G.; Roth, T. A.; Prati, F.; Shoichet, B. K. The
Deacylation Mechanism of Ampc Beta-Lactamase at Ultrahigh
Resolution. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 2970-2976.
(31) Weston, G. S.; Blazquez, J.; Baquero, F.; Shoichet, B. K. StructureBased Enhancement of Boronic Acid-Based Inhibitors of Ampc BetaLactamase. J. Med. Chem. 1998, 41, 4577-4586.

JM061317Y

