© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

REVIEW

Statistical practice in high-throughput
screening data analysis
Nathalie Malo1,2, James A Hanley2, Sonia Cerquozzi1, Jerry Pelletier3 & Robert Nadon1,4
High-throughput screening is an early critical step in drug discovery. Its aim is to screen a large number of diverse chemical
compounds to identify candidate ‘hits’ rapidly and accurately. Few statistical tools are currently available, however, to detect
quality hits with a high degree of confidence. We examine statistical aspects of data preprocessing and hit identification for
primary screens. We focus on concerns related to positional effects of wells within plates, choice of hit threshold and the
importance of minimizing false-positive and false-negative rates. We argue that replicate measurements are needed to verify
assumptions of current methods and to suggest data analysis strategies when assumptions are not met. The integration of
replicates with robust statistical methods in primary screens will facilitate the discovery of reliable hits, ultimately improving the
sensitivity and specificity of the screening process.

High-throughput screening (HTS) is the backbone of drug discovery within the pharmaceutical industry. Over the past decade it has
also made its way into academic settings. The combination of robotic
methods, parallel processing and miniaturization of biological assays
has dramatically increased throughput. The potential to increase the
hit discovery rate has been offset, however, by increased research costs.
Despite the current popularity of HTS and major improvements in
processing, the new drug approval rate has declined significantly1.
Developers are attempting to counter this inefficiency by various
means, including developing biotech-pharmaceutical alliances and
changing their internal organizational structures by merging multiple
disciplines associated with lead generation and validation2. Likewise,
HTS programs are being integrated within academic settings where
alternative targets and diseases of lesser commercial value can be
explored3. At the root, the challenge is to find the next marketable drug
while simultaneously maximizing the number of screened targets and
compounds, minimizing costs per well and optimizing the lead generation and validation process.
Two kinds of inference or decision error can occur at the primary
screen step: ‘false positives’ and ‘false negatives’—it is unclear if current inefficiencies are due mostly to the generation of too many false
positives, too many false negatives or both. We advance the view that
improving hit specificity and sensitivity cannot be met by technological
and organizational improvements alone and that improvements in data
analysis methods are needed to fulfill the promise of HTS.
1McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, 740 avenue du
Docteur Penfield, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A4. 2McGill University
Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Occupational Health, 1020
Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A4. 3McGill University
Department of Biochemistry, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, H3A 1A4. 4McGill University Department of Human Genetics,
1205 avenue du Docteur Penfield N5/13, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3A 1B1.
Correspondence should be addressed to R.N. (robert.nadon@mcgill.ca).

Published online 7 February 2006; doi:10.1038/nbt1186

NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006

HTS is a large-scale process (Fig. 1) that screens many thousands
of chemical compounds in order to identify potential lead candidates
rapidly and accurately. Whereas the plating format and number of
compounds per plate can vary, typically just a single measurement of
each compound’s activity is obtained in an initial primary screen. The

A biological assay
(specific target
& reagents)

Primary screen

A large
library of
chemical compounds

‘Hits’

Secondary screen
& counter screen

‘Confirmed hits’

Structure-activity relationship (SAR)
& medicinal chemistry

‘Leads’

Clinical trials
(phase 1, 2, 3)

‘Drug’

Figure 1 From HTS process to eventual drug development.

167

REVIEW
a

b

Positive controls
Compound 1
Compound 2
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

A

Positive controls
Compound 1
Compound 2
1

Negative
controls

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

Negative
controls

C

C

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

3

B

B

8 Rows

2

A

D

8 Rows

E
F

Empty wells

D
E
F

G

G

H

H
Compound 80

Compound 80
12 Columns

12 Columns

Figure 2 Typical location of controls on a 96-well plate. In a primary screen, the designed biological assay is performed by using a robot to add the target
of interest and specific reagents to each well, which already contain a different compound or control. After incubation or other required manipulations, an
activity measurement is obtained for every well by automated plate reading. These raw data represent the activity measurement of each compound or control
against a specified target. The measurement units and the scales depend on the design of the biological assay, the target of interest and the specific reader
or imager that is used. (a) Generally, in a compound library, 80 different compounds (gray circles) are stored in the middle of a 96-well plate and wells on
the first and last columns are left empty. Often in a high-throughput screen, eight positive controls (red circles) are placed in column 1 and four negative
controls (blue circles) are placed in column 12. The other four wells (white circles) in column 12 remain empty and are not used. (b) Ideally, controls should
be located randomly among the 96 wells of each plate. Only the first and the last columns are typically available for controls, since compounds (gray circles)
are stored in the 80 middle wells. Despite this limitation, edge-related bias can be minimized by alternating the eight positive controls (red circles) and the
eight negative controls (blue circles) in the available wells, such that they appear equally on each of the eight rows and each of the two available columns.

automated process allows the testing of several hundred plates over a
period of weeks. Compounds identified for follow-up (labeled ‘hits’)
are evaluated for biological relevance by a counter screen and confirmed
as bona fide hits by a secondary screen.
Secondary screens test many fewer compounds (e.g., the 1% most
active compounds from the primary screen4) and typically use at least
duplicate measurements. Paradoxically, compounds with the highest measured activity levels on a primary screen will on average be less extreme

on a secondary screen because of a statistical artifact known as ‘regression
toward the mean’5,6. Accordingly, marginal hits on the first run may fail to
validate on the second run merely because of random measurement error,
although the size of the statistical artifact can be minimized by improving measurement precision (e.g., by obtaining replicate measurements).
Confirmed hits with an established biological activity according to a structure-activity relationship (SAR) series and medicinal chemistry are termed
‘leads’ that can develop into drug candidates for clinical testing.

Box 1 Formulae for normalization
Percent of control. A qualitative measure of test compound activity
defined as
x
POC = i × 100
c¯
where xi is the raw measurement on the ith compound and −
c is
the mean of the measurements on the positive controls in an
antagonist assay.
Normalized percent inhibition. Another normalization method using
controls:
NPI =

c̄ + – xi
c̄ + – c̄–

where xi is the raw measurement on the ith compound, −
c + and −
c–
are the means of the measurements on the positive and negative
controls, respectively, in an antagonist assay.
Z score. A simple and widely known normalizing method
calculated as
Z=

xi – x¯
sx

where xi is the raw measurement on the ith compound, −
x and

168

sx are the mean and the standard deviation, respectively, of all
measurements within the plate.
B score9. The residual (rijp) of the measurement for row i and
column j on the pth plate is obtained by fitting a two-way median
polish and is defined below as
r = y – yˆ = y –( µˆ + Rˆ + Cˆ )
ijp

ijp

ijp

ijp

ip

jp

The residual is defined as the difference between the observed
result (yijp) and the fitted value (ŷijp , defined as the estimated
average of the plate (µ̂p) + estimated systematic measurement
offset for row i on plate p (R̂ip) + estimated systematic
measurement column offset for column j on plate p (Ĉjp)).
For each plate p, the adjusted median absolute deviation (MADp)
is obtained from the rijp’s (MADp). The B score is calculated as
follows:
Bscore =

rijp
MADp

Median absolute deviation (MAD). A robust estimate of spread of
the rijp’s values:
median{|rijp – median(rijp)|}

VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY

Inferential errors can be caused by ‘noise’ due to technical or procedural factors, including assay formats, poor pipette delivery, robotic
failures and unintended differences in compound concentrations due to
evaporation of solvent, either from the compound collection or during
the assay set-up. Errors of unknown origin may also develop over the
course of the entire screen. Their adverse effects can often be minimized
by quality control procedures, although statistical corrections may also
be needed to mitigate the effects of uncontrolled variation (see “HTS
data processing” section). Other factors that are less amenable to procedural quality control but that can nonetheless add extraneous variation
include potency differences across compounds, and systematic acrossplate and within-plate column or row biases (e.g., edge effects).
Differences in variability can also create inequalities among the compounds. The measured activity of low variability compounds will almost
always be close to their true levels. Thus, even when measured in singlet,
hits are more easily discovered and false hits more easily avoided with
these compounds. By contrast, the measured activity levels of highly variable compounds may differ considerably from their true values. It is correspondingly more difficult to discover hits and to avoid false positives.
Once technical and procedural efficiencies have been optimized,
the only way to minimize variability further is to obtain estimates of
activity levels by taking averages (e.g., mean, median) across replicate
measurements. Activity estimates based on repeated measurements are
less variable than estimates based on single measurements. Replicate
measurements also provide direct estimates of variability, which can be
used to estimate the probability of detecting true hits (power analysis),
facilitating cost/benefit analyses. Moreover, replicates reduce the number
of false negatives without increasing the number of false positives (see
“Use of replicates” section).
We review current data preprocessing and hit identification methods
for primary screening. We discuss their use and limitations, problems
with the constant error assumption, the influence of hit threshold on
false-positive and false-negative rates, and factors that can degrade assay
sensitivity and specificity. We also discuss the advantages of replicates
and make recommendations for the statistical analysis of HTS.

Figure 3 Titration series in a translation assay. These results from an
anisomycin titration in a Renilla luciferase translation assay show that
variability differs across the various concentrations. A hit may be defined as
any activity measurement that is at least three standard deviations away from
the mean of the control measurements. This corresponds to a dual intensity
value of 19,894 (dotted line). All of the measurements for concentrations
≥0.78 are hits (all of the values are below the dotted line). There were six
false positives, however, for the three lowest nonnull concentrations.

explicitly in this manner has the advantage of suggesting how sensitivity
and specificity gains can be achieved most cost effectively.
Current practice. Because of the manner in which compound collections are plated, controls are typically placed contiguously on the
outer columns (Fig. 2). Unfortunately, a systematic outer column effect
affects all of the measurements on the plate because they are adjusted
relative to these controls. For example, edge effects may lower (or
increase) detection levels on average along the edge compared to the

NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006

169

20

40

60

80

100

Figure 4 Presence of edge effects in a high-throughput screen. Data from
two different screens (http://chembank.broad.harvard.edu/screens) with
duplicate measurements across plates are presented. Tukey’s two-way
median polish was applied to each plate to obtain estimates of row and
column effects and of residuals (that is, compound measurements after
the polish procedure removed any row and column effects). For each plate,
variances of the 16 row effects and of the 24 column effects were divided by
the variance of the 384 residuals. Box plots of these variance ratios illustrate
the presence of a column effect for screen 295.

Variance (effects)/variance (residuals)

HTS data processing
A well-defined and highly sensitive test system requires both quality
control and accurate measurements. Within-plate reference controls
are typically used for these purposes. Controls help to identify plate-toplate variability and establish assay background levels. Normalization of
raw data removes systematic plate-to-plate variation, making measurements comparable across plates. Systematic errors decrease the validity
of results by either over- or underestimating true values. These biases
can affect all measurements equally or can depend on factors such as
well location, liquid dispensing and signal intensity. Although recent
improvements in automation can minimize bias, and thereby provide
more reproducible results, equipment malfunctions can nonetheless
introduce systematic errors, which must be corrected at the data processing and analysis stages.
Measured compound activity is a function of at least two factors: the
compound’s true activity and random error (see also “Use of replicates”
section). Symbolically, one simple additive model might be Yijp = µijp +
εijp where Yijp is the observed raw measurement obtained from the well
located on row i and column j on the pth plate, µijp is the ‘true’ activity
and εijp is the effect of all sources of error. Assuming no bias, the εijk’s are
assumed to have zero mean and a specified probability distribution (e.g.,
normal). Another simple model is Yijp = µijp + Rip + Cjp + εijp where R
and C represent plate-specific row and column artifacts, respectively, and
εijp represents remaining sources of error. (This latter model is assumed
by the median polish procedure described below.) Specifying models

0

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

REVIEW

Column effect

Screen
295

Row effect

Column effect

Row effect

Screen
900

REVIEW
a

b

c
Threshold

Threshold

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

H0: ‘no hits’

False
negatives
(8.8%)

Threshold

H1: ‘hits’

False
positives
(5%)

H0: ‘no hits’

False
negatives
(4.3%)

H1: ‘hits’

H0: ‘no hits’

False
positives
(10%)

H1: ‘hits’

False
negatives
(0.5%)

False
positives
(5%)

Figure 5 Replicates, false-positive and false-negative rates. In hypothesis testing a false-positive rate (type I error) is the probability of rejecting the null
hypothesis (H0) given that this hypothesis is true. The false-negative rate (type II error) is the probability of failing to reject the null hypothesis (H0) given
that the alternative hypothesis (H1) is true. (a) Given a fixed threshold value, the false-negative and false-positive rates are represented by the blue and the
orange areas under the curve, respectively. (b) Decreasing the threshold value results in an increase in the false-positive rate and a decrease in the falsenegative rate. The opposite would be true if the threshold value were increased. (c) The benefit of multiple measurements (replicates) is illustrated. The use
of replicates reduces data variability, which is reflected in the narrowed data distributions. Consequently, the false-negative rate is minimized whereas the
false-positive rate remains fixed.

remainder of the plate. Consequently, background correction will be
lower (or higher) if controls are located on this edge, causing compound activities to appear higher (or lower) than their true states.
Worse still, the edge effects may be present in some plates but not others
(see “Recommendations” section below). Cell-based biological controls
are especially problematic because of variable growth patterns7; cell
clumping or evaporation within different areas of the plate can lead
to different growth conditions and ultimately to position-related bias.
Regardless of cause, positional effects increase the rate of false positives
and false negatives.
‘Percent of control’ is one preprocessing method that attempts to
correct for plate-to-plate variability by normalizing compound measurements relative to controls. Raw measurements for each compound,
for example, can be divided by the average of within-plate controls.
‘Normalized percent inhibition’ is another control-based method in
which the difference between the compound measurement and the
mean of the positive controls is divided by the difference between the
means of the measurements on the positive and the negative controls.
The ‘Z score’ method excludes control measurements altogether under
the assumption that most compounds are inactive and can serve as
controls; compound measurements are rescaled relative to within-plate

variation by subtracting the average of the plate values and dividing the
difference by the standard deviation estimated from all measurements
of the plate (see Box 1).
The three methods described above implicitly assume a random error
distribution that is common to all measurements within a single plate,
although without replicates this assumption cannot be verified directly.
Positive and negative controls may exhibit differences in variability, however, raising questions about the constant error assumption. Differences
in variability among compounds are also likely inasmuch as inactive
compounds are similar to negative controls, and active compounds
are similar to positive controls8. For example, Figure 3 shows results
from a titration series of a protein translation assay in which variability
among replicates differs across the various concentrations. In general,
nonconstant variances among the compounds of interest may be due to
differences in luminescence, reactivity or solubility. The serious errors
of inference that can arise from incorrectly assuming one distribution
even when departures from it are minimal have been cogently described
by Tukey9.
Another potential difficulty is that these three methods rely on nonrobust statistics. Means and standard deviations are greatly influenced
by statistical outliers, which in the context of HTS are putative hits. In

Box 2 Examining the distribution of sample variances
Under the assumption of normally distributed errors with mean µ
and variance σ2, the statistic
(K – 1)s 2

σ2
is distributed as a χ2 with K – 1 degrees of freedom where s2
is the sample variance for each of the K replicated compound
measurements.
For each compound, consider the model:
yk = xk' β + ε k
where k = 1,…,K replicates and it is assumed that:

εk ~ N (0, σ 2)

170

A standard Bayesian choice for a prior distribution of the variances
is an inverse gamma with unknown parameters a and b:
The a and b parameters are assumed to be constant across

σ –2 ~ G (a,b) ≡ x

a–1

exp (–x / b)
Γ(a)ba

compounds and can be estimated from the data from all
compounds by fitting an F-distribution to the sample
variances s2:
Wright and Simon’s18 procedure for estimating the a and b
ab(s2) ~ F (K – 1),2a
parameters was used to generate the data shown in Figure 7.

VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY

0.8
0.6
0.4

(KS: P = 2.9 × 10–7)
0.6

0.8

1.0

(KS: P = 2.9 × 10–7)
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.2

Recommendations. In the absence of compelling reasons to the
contrary, we prefer normalizing the data without using controls.
Specifically, we prefer the B score method, especially if row or column biases are suspected. Evidence of these biases can be obtained

0.4
0.6
Quantile

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Quantile

0.8

1.0

0.5
0.3

0.5
0.3

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.1

Data:
empirical
theoretical
(KS: P = 3.1 × 1010)

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.3

0.3

0.5

0.2

0.5

0.0

Data:
empirical
theoretical
(KS: P = 0.22)
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Quantile

NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006

0.8

Data:
empirical
theoretical
(KS: P = 0.77)

0.1

Cumulative distribution

1.0

Z score

Data:
empirical
theoretical
(KS: P = 0.07)

0.1

Cumulative distribution

B score

Screen
900

0.8

by examining the variability of the row and column effects estimated
by the median polish procedure relative to the residual compound
measurements. To illustrate, we reanalyzed two publicly available
screening data sets with duplicate measurements for a yeast peptide
inhibition assay and a DNA synthesis assay (http://chembank.broad.
harvard.edu/screens; screen numbers 295 and 900, respectively).
Figure 4 shows a strong and variable column effect for screen 295.
Moreover, as we demonstrate in the “Use of replicates” section, the
variability of B scores may more adequately reflect actual random
error conditions. This in turn facilitates the decision process because
the compound measurements can be benchmarked against theoretical
error distributions.
If researchers were to use the Z score method, we would advise they
use robust versions to minimize the undesirable influence of outlier
compounds (that is, ‘hits’). For example, in a ‘jackknife’ Z score method,
−
x and sx (third equation in Box 1) are calculated excluding the compound of interest (x value in the equation); accordingly, sx differs for
each individual compound. Alternatively, in a ‘robust’ Z score method,
−
x and sx are replaced by more robust measures (e.g., median and median
absolute deviation, respectively).

statistical terms, the mean and the standard deviation have low breakdown points, in contrast to more resistant location and scale estimators (e.g., median, Tukey biweight, median absolute deviation). One
recent proposal circumvents these issues by adopting a more robust
data analysis procedure.
The B score10 is a robust analog of the Z score which uses an index
of dispersion that is more resistant to the presence of outliers and more
robust to differences in the measurement error distributions of the compounds (Box 1). A two-way median polish is first computed to account
for row and column effects of the plate. The resulting residuals within
each plate are then divided by their median absolute deviation to standardize for plate-to-plate variability. The B score has three advantages: it
is nonparametric (that is, makes minimal distributional assumptions),
it minimizes measurement bias due to positional effects and is resistant
to statistical outliers.

Screen
295

0.6

Data:
empirical
theoretical
(KS: P = 6.7 × 10–6)

0.2

0.2

Data:
empirical
theoretical
(KS: P = 6.9 × 10–5)
0.0

Figure 7 Verification of the assumption that the
within-compound variances follow an inverse
gamma distribution. Empirical values correspond
to a function of the sample variances. Under the
assumption of normally distributed data, each
sample variance (obtained from the duplicate
measurements) is multiplied by the estimated
a and b parameters of the inverse gamma
distribution and the result should follow an F
distribution with 1 and 2a degrees of freedom
(Box 2). Results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS)
test of differences between the theoretical and
the empirical distributions are shown.

0.4

0.6

0.4

0.6

0.2

Data:
empirical
theoretical

0.2

Data:
empirical
theoretical

0.0

Screen
900

Z score

0.6
0.4

Screen
295

0.2

Cumulative distribution

B score

Cumulative distribution

Figure 6 Verification of the assumptions of
normally distributed data with constant variance
among compounds. Empirical values correspond
to a function of the sample variances. Under
the assumption of a constant variance among
compounds, the overall variance might be
estimated by the mean of the sample variances.
Each sample variance (obtained from the
duplicate measurements) is multiplied by (K – 1)
and divided by the overall variance estimate and
the ratios should follow a chi-square distribution
with 1 degree of freedom (Box 2). Results of the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test of differences
between the theoretical and the empirical
distributions are shown.

0.1

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

REVIEW

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Quantile

171

REVIEW
Box 3 Test statistics for hit detection with replicates
One sample t-test: With K replicates, for each compound a Student
t statistic is

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

t=

x¯ – cons
s 1/K

where −
x and s are the arithmetic mean and the standard deviation,
respectively, of the K replicate measurements, cons is a constant
typically equal to zero. t follows a t-distribution with K – 1 degrees
of freedom.
‘Modified’ one-sample t-test: After estimation of the a and b
parameters by fitting an inverse gamma distribution to the set
of variances across replicates for each compound (see Box 2), a
variation of the previous standard t-test is:
∼ x¯ – cons
t= ∼
s 1/K
where
2

–1

(K – 1)s + 2a(ab)
s∼2 =
(K – 1) + 2a

where x− and s2 are the arithmetic mean and the variance,
respectively, of the K replicate measurements. The degrees of
freedom for the test are now K – 1 + 2a, an increase of 2a over
the standard t-test.

Controls, if necessary for a specific assay, should be used carefully.
Ideally, they should be located randomly within plates, thereby minimizing row or column biases. Current compound collection formats,
however, do not lend themselves to randomization. Potential positional
effects can nonetheless be minimized by varying the location of controls
within plates in a systematic manner. One way consists of alternating
well locations for the positive and negative controls along the available edges of the plate (Fig. 2). Thus, positive and negative controls
will appear equally in each row and in each column and may minimize
edge-related bias. For example, in a 96-well plate, an order effect may
produce different biases among the different columns. The current practice consisting of eight positive controls on the first column and four
negative controls on the last column (Fig. 2a) is less efficient than the
alternating method (Fig. 2b).
If controls are used to normalize compound intensities, it is important
to obtain as accurate and precise measurements as possible: any inaccuracies and random measurement errors will lower the accuracy and precision
of the normalized values through error propagation. One way to improve
precision is to obtain a relatively large number of control measurements
(see the “Use of replicates: recommendations” section). Another way is to
delete outliers among the controls before normalizing. Identifying measurement outliers among controls is more straightforward than among the
compounds of interest because the control measurements are replicates of
the same measurement process and should have similar values.

s~2 can be viewed as a weighted average of the observed
compound-specific variance s2 and an estimate (ab)–1 of
the ‘typical’ error variance underlying the error distributions
of different compounds. The weights are (K – 1) and 2a,
respectively. A very large value of a is equivalent to assuming
a common variance across all compounds and to simply
averaging all of the observed variances, thereby virtually ignoring
compound-specific variances. Smaller values of a imply that the
underlying variances across compounds are heterogeneous and
that the observed compound-specific variances be ‘trusted’ more.
In Figure 7, the values of a for screens 295 and 900 were 2.84
and 3.64, respectively for the B scores, and 1.11 and 4.12,
respectively, for the Z scores. Accordingly, the estimates were
1:2.84 and 1:3.64 amalgams of the compound-specific and the
‘typical’ variances for the B scores, and similarly 1:1.11 and
1:4.12 for the Z scores.
For an unreplicated compound, so that K – 1 = 0, ~
s 2 is simply
the typical value, estimated by the quantity (ab)–1 with 2a
degrees of freedom (e.g., ~6 d.f. for the B scores), which is a
compromise between zero degrees of freedom associated with
single measurements and ‘number of compounds – 1’ degrees
of freedom (that is, 2,687 and 3,839 degrees of freedom,
respectively for screen 295 and 900) associated with a common
error model.

Once data have been preprocessed with quality control checks and
normalization procedures, the next critical step is to decide which
compounds should be processed in a secondary screen. Currently,
this inferential process is not well defined statistically: procedures for
hit identification are based on informal ‘rules of thumb’ rather than
on probabilistic judgments of error rates. In academic settings and in
smaller companies, informal rules may also be based on particular laboratory constraints such as capacity limitations. Although it is generally
appreciated that lowering the hit-threshold increases false-positive rates
while lowering false-negative rates, statistical models can better quantify
the balance between specificity and sensitivity by assigning probabilities
to the two types of inferential errors (Fig. 5).

Statistical inference and hit identification thresholds
Regardless of library design strategy (rational or combinatorial), statistical methods offer the means to characterize quality of screens and of hits
within a probabilistic framework. Quality can be defined as the ability
of the screening process to accurately identify compounds that can be
developed into potential leads11. A statistical approach to these issues
has a number of advantages, including objectivity, reproducibility and
ease of comparison across screens.

Current practice. One way to identify hits is to plot raw or preprocessed
measurements against compound identity (that is, plot each activity
measurement on the y-axis and the well identity 1,2,... 96 on the x-axis)
for each plate separately. Compounds whose measured activity deviates from the bulk of the activity measurements are identified as hits.
Although this subjective ‘eyeball’ method may be adequate for identifying highly active compounds, potentially important compounds of
low or intermediate potency are difficult to identify reliably and may
be missed.
Hits can also be identified as a percentage of the compounds that
generate the highest measured activity (e.g., top 1%4). From an optimization perspective, this method is arbitrary and suffers from the absence
of a probability model. Without prior consideration of the true number
of active compounds, one cannot optimize the percentage of primary
screen compounds to be screened a second time. If the number of identified potential hits is dictated by the capacity for secondary screening,
specificity and sensitivity may vary widely across screens. Consequently,
the quality of the results from screen to screen within a laboratory will
depend on the extent to which threshold choice reflects the actual number of true active compounds in the various screens.

172

VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

REVIEW
Compounds whose activity exceeds a fixed ‘percent of control’ threshold may also be considered as hits. For example, in an agonist assay any
compound with an activity measurement that is at least twice the average
of the measurements on the negative controls is deemed a hit.
Alternatively, the hit threshold may be defined as a number of
standard deviations (typically 3) beyond the mean of the raw or processed data. However, hits (outliers) may cause the distribution of the
compound measurements to be skewed. Such a phenomenon may be
observed when performing a fluorescent-based assay and when a large
number of compounds in the collection are fluorescent. Statistically,
imagine the observations as arising from a mixture of two populations
with different means (e.g., nonactive compound measurements centered
around one mean and active compound measurements around a different mean—likely with different standard deviations also).
As with the preprocessing methods described earlier, the threshold
methods described above assume a common magnitude of random error
for all measurements and rely on nonrobust statistics, which may lead to
inferential errors in hit detection. Hit detection depends jointly on compound concentration, potency and variability. Potency will differ across
compounds within a screen, as will actual concentrations due to uncontrolled factors such as solvent evaporation and compound solubility.
The easiest hits to detect will be compounds with high relative potencies
and concentrations and low variability (Fig. 3). Singlet-measurement
false positives for the three lowest nonnull concentrations were eliminated when activity measurements were based on means across the eight
replicate measurements per concentration. Methods that estimate random error without assuming constant error are described in “Use of
replicates: recommendations” below.

measurements and to conduct statistical power analysis. Judicious use of
replicates will improve sensitivity to minimally active but pharmacologically important compounds that go undetected otherwise.
Use of replicates
Random error reflects inevitable uncertainties in all scientific measurements. This noise unpredictably raises or lowers measurements relative
to their true values. Potential sources of random error include biological,
instrument and human-related influences. Random error accumulates
as a collection of several minimal differences across assays, such as voltage variation, liquid dispensing differences, as well as reagent or sample
preparation and handling11. Compound-related problems involving
chemical properties and activity (e.g., stability, solubility, autofluorescence and degradation) also affect measurement precision.
Precision can be increased by obtaining replicates and by minimizing
extraneous variation due to sample handling and processing. Random
error estimates, which are central to statistical inference, are typically
obtained from replicate measurements of the same attribute or process.
Having empirical estimates of variability allows one to use statistical
power analysis to control the false-negative rate while maintaining a
fixed false-positive rate (Fig. 5). We anticipate that obtaining replicates
for at least some compounds in primary screens will become more
routine.

Recommendations. One view about false negatives is that little can be
done about them and so it is best to adopt a forward-looking perspective and to pursue the hits one does have. We contend, however, that it
is important to quantify potential false-negative rates before deciding
whether or not they are negligible in a particular screen. If 0.1% of a million compounds to be screened are truly active, a low false-negative rate
of 2% represents 20 potential candidates lost. With synthetic compound
collections, the potential loss may be lessened because they are made
from a set number of basic scaffolds. Thus, in practice, missing an active
compound may not matter if related compounds are detected. When
screening natural products or extracts, however, truly unique chemical
entities will go undetected. Although it is difficult to assign a monetary
value to these lost candidates, decisions to not follow-up will typically
not be revisited and as such represent irretrievable financial losses.
Verifying data handling assumptions and contrasting various approaches
in formal methodological studies are important steps in determining the
most cost-effective procedures. Additivity assumptions, for example, can
readily be verified from a simple graphical procedure once the data have
been preprocessed by the median polish procedure12. This same procedure
provides a simple method for determining the appropriate data transformation (e.g., log), which will produce additive measurements.
These various steps are necessary for quantifying many aspects of the
decision-making process in HTS. Currently, many important go/no-go
decisions are based on perceived necessity (e.g., affordability, capacity),
subjective perception and past experience. These considerations must
enter into any decision process. Statistical modeling of the type we are
encouraging enhances rather than replaces this process. Although we
believe that currently practiced methods are often insufficiently sensitive to detect hits that arise from potentially important but marginally
active compounds, attempts to improve sensitivity must be balanced
against specificity and demonstrate cost effectiveness. One way to quantify this balance is to obtain estimates of random error from replicate

Current practice. Compounds in primary screens are typically measured only once because of time and cost issues, although the use of
duplicate measurements has been recognized for secondary screens
and is beginning to be recommended for primary screens (http://iccb.
med.harvard.edu/screening/guidelines.htm). Absent replicates, strong
assumptions must be made to estimate random error. For example,
Buxser and Vroegop13 describe an approach in which the variability
among replicated control measurements is used to estimate variability
of the unreplicated compound measurements. Alternatively, random
error can be estimated from the variability across single measurements
of all compounds on a plate, assuming that all compounds are inactive
and that they all have the same random error; early approaches to gene
expression microarray analysis adopted a similar approach for estimating error from single measurements14. Single measurement methods
have ultimately proven inadequate15, however, and it is now standard
practice to obtain at least three replicates per measurement in recognition that replicates offer advantages that outweigh short-term cost
considerations16,17.
Ideal replicates are those measurements that are repeated for the same
compound under the same experimental conditions. For this reason
and because they underestimate total random error, multiple rereadings of the same plate are not recommended as replicates, except as
a check for possible extraneous variation due to the reading process
itself. Similarly, structurally similar compounds (analogs) are not recommended as replicates, despite the fact that they may show comparable activity. Nor should measurements of the same compounds under
different experimental circumstances (e.g., primary versus secondary
screen) be used as replicates because they may be influenced by different extraneous factors (e.g., differences among reagents, batches of
compounds and time effects). Finally, pooling compounds in various
combinations within individual wells offers timesaving advantages but
cannot be considered replication in the usual sense. For example, false
positives are more likely to arise when weakly interacting compounds
are pooled in the same well or when true active compounds within a
row increase. By contrast, false negatives are less common in compound
pooling, but may arise if pooled compounds have opposite biological
effects of similar size2.

NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006

173

REVIEW
Recommendations. Replicates offer the twin advantages of greater precision for activity measurements and the means to estimate variability
associated with the measurements. Compared with the uncertainty of
a single measurement, the imprecision (standard error) of a mean is
reduced by

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

100 × (1 – 1/ n ) %
where n refers to the number of replicates. Having two replicates reduces
imprecision by 29%; having three replicates reduces it by a further 13%
while having four replicates reduces it an additional 8% (that is, to
50% of the imprecision associated with a single measurement). Thus,
replicates make minimally and moderately active compounds easier
to detect.
Replicates may appear in wells on the same or on different plates.
Although within-plate variation (due, for example, to plate composition
and handling) will typically be smaller, across-plate replication is preferred because it represents a more realistic estimate of variation necessary for generalizing results beyond the immediate sample. In general, it
is important to obtain estimates of total variability of any measurement
process, what has been called ‘genuine replication’18.
We have argued that much of current practice makes strong assumptions about the data (e.g., same magnitude of random error associated
with all measurements), which if incorrect can increase both the falsepositive and the false-negative rates. Without large-scale studies with
replicated measurements, these assumptions and the advantages of more
complex statistical modeling approaches are difficult to verify. Moreover,
it is unlikely that one approach will be optimal for all screens. These
caveats notwithstanding, minimal replication can be used to examine
the reasonableness of current assumptions and to potentially improve
overall screen sensitivity and specificity.
We illustrate the importance of preprocessing, the need to check
assumptions regarding error distributions and the other options available
when assumptions are not met, by performing additional analyses on the
Figure 4 data. If the errors associated with the normalized compound
measurements from these screens were normally distributed with constant variance across compounds, the sample variances based on the
duplicate measurements would follow a χ2 (1) distribution (Box 2).
Figure 6 illustrates the lack of fit, however, between the theoretical and
the observed variance distributions for these data, indicating that the
normality/constant variance combined assumption is not tenable after
preprocessing by either the B score or the Z score procedures.
Alternatively, one can assume that the error associated with compound
measurements is normally distributed but with unequal variances distributed across the compounds according to an inverse gamma distribution (Box 2). An empirical Bayes approach using this model has been
used successfully for analysis of microarray data with minimal replication15,19,20. Figure 7 shows that the error variances of the data sets from
Figure 6 fit an inverse gamma distribution for both data sets for the B
scores and for one of the data sets for the Z scores. An important advantage of this variance distribution pattern is that standard statistical tests
of compound activity can be constructed using a weighted average of the
compound-specific variances estimated from replicated measurements
and the overall estimate obtained from the variance distribution; when
only a random subsample of the compounds has been replicated, the
latter variance estimate can be applied to compounds measured only
in singlet from the same screen (Box 3). In either case, the more similar
the compound-specific variances are to each other, the more reliable the
overall variance estimate will be. This in turn will provide more degrees of
freedom and more power for the statistical tests. Figure 7 also illustrates
the value of correcting for row and column effects. In the presence of

174

column or row biases (screen 295), B scores more closely approximated
the theoretical inverse gamma distribution than the corresponding Z
scores, although in their absence (screen 900) the B score method produced a slightly poorer fit.
As more extensively replicated data sets become available, other dataanalytic approaches can be examined and optimized. For example,
although we found no evidence of a relationship between signal intensity and replicate variability in the two data sets we examined, such a
relationship has been used in the microarray context in combination
with the inverse gamma variance distribution assumption21; this type
of relationship may provide additional useful information for estimating random error associated with replicate and singlet measurements.
Similarly, if various classes of compounds are thought to differ in terms
of variability, random subsets of the various classes may produce more
accurate estimates of variability when examined separately. Another
approach that may show promise is to model the distribution of activity
measurements as a mixture of two distributions (inactive and active
compounds)13. In short, the principle of ‘borrowing strength’ from
information available from the data in total can provide useful information that would normally be obtained only from large numbers of
replicates.
Conclusions
Statistics currently serve a limited role in HTS. One use is to correlate
chemical properties with activity levels at the screen development stage
to provide information for compound selection and for property modification to enhance chemical activity22,23. Once the screen has been run,
data mining software packages are increasingly being used for quality
control. Notwithstanding these advances in data analysis, HTS continues
to lack universal procedures for processing and extracting knowledge
from screens24. We discuss four broad conclusions below that we believe
are warranted at this early stage of development for the statistical modeling of HTS data.
Replicate measurements provide numerous advantages for checking measurement assumptions and improving hit/non-hit decisions.
Moreover, quantification and characterization of error variances
obtained from replicate measurements allow specificity and sensitivity
optimization of individual screens. Given fixed costs, standard statistical
power analysis can be used to reach cost-effective decisions regarding
the number of plates within a screen to be replicated and the number
of replicates.
Statistically adjusting measurements for row and column effects
through procedures such as the median polish offers gains in inference
and should be used routinely.
The assumption of a common error variance across compounds
implicit to many current hit identification approaches is incorrect
at least some of the time. At a minimum, the assumption should be
routinely verified by replicating some of the compounds and checked
against theoretically derived distributions. When the assumption of
constant error is untenable, the empirical Bayes approach to estimating
random error offers an attractive alternative. It provides an amalgam
of the specific within-compound variations (if measured in replicate)
and the error estimate derived from the distribution of the withincompound variances, with the latter alone providing the ‘best’ estimate
when a particular compound has not been replicated. This combination of sources of information is a compromise between using only the
within-compound (and thus highly variable) error estimates and the
average but unrealistic (and thus falsely precise) pooled error estimate
that would be appropriate under a common error model.
The limitations of standard statistical approaches with minimal replication can be partially offset by ‘borrowing strength’ from the large

VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006 NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY

© 2006 Nature Publishing Group http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology

REVIEW

1. Dove, A. Screening for content—the evolution of high throughput. Nat. Biotechnol.
21, 859–864 (2003).
2. Landro, J.A. et al. HTS in the new millennium: the role of pharmacology and flexibility.
J. Pharmacol. Toxicol. Methods 44, 273–289 (2000).
3. Stein, R.L. High-throughput screening in academia: the Harvard experience. J. Biomol.
Screen. 8, 615–619 (2003).
4. Nelson, R.M. & Yingling, J.D. Introduction to High-Throughput Screening for Drug
Discovery (IBC USA Conferences, Inc., San Diego, CA, 2004).
5. Campbell, D.T. & Kenny, D.A. A Primer on Regression Artifacts (Guilford Press, New
York, 1999).
6. Stigler, S.M. Statistics on the Table: the History of Statistical Concepts and Methods

(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999).
7. Lundholt, B.K., Scudder, K.M. & Pagliaro, L. A simple technique for reducing edge
effect in cell-based assays. J. Biomol. Screen. 8, 566–570 (2003).
8. Zhang, J.H., Chung, T.D.Y. & Oldenburg, K.R. Confirmation of primary active substances
from high throughput screening of chemical and biological populations: a statistical
approach and practical considerations. J. Comb. Chem. 2, 258–265 (2000).
9. Tukey, J.W. A survey of sampling from contaminated distributions. in Contributions to
Probability and Statistics (ed. Olkin, I.) 448–485 (Stanford University Press, Stanford,
CA, 1960).
10. Brideau, C., Gunter, B., Pikounis, B. & Liaw, A. Improved statistical methods for hit
selection in high-throughput screening. J. Biomol. Screen. 8, 634–647 (2003).
11. Gunter, B., Brideau, C., Pikounis, B. & Liaw, A. Statistical and graphical methods for
quality control determination of high-throughput screening data. J. Biomol. Screen.
8, 624–633 (2003).
12. Hoaglin, D.C., Mosteller, F. & Tukey, J.W. Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data
Analysis (Wiley, New York, 1983).
13. Buxser, S. & Vroegop, S. Calculating the probability of detection for inhibitors in enzymatic or binding reactions in high-throughput screening. Anal. Biochem. 340, 1–13
(2005).
14. Chen, Y., Dougherty, E.R. & Bittner, M.L. Ratio-based decisions and the quantitative
analysis of cDNA microarray images. J. Biomed. Opt. 2, 364–374 (1997).
15. Rocke, D.M. Design and analysis of experiments with high throughput biological assay
data. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 15, 703–713 (2004).
16. Lee, M.L., Kuo, F.C., Whitmore, G.A. & Sklar, J. Importance of replication in microarray gene expression studies: statistical methods and evidence from repetitive cDNA
hybridizations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 9834–9839 (2000).
17. Nadon, R. & Shoemaker, J. Statistical issues with microarrays: processing and analysis.
Trends Genet. 18, 265–271 (2002).
18. Box, G.E.P., Hunter, J.S. & Hunter, W.G. Statistics for Experimenters: Design,
Innovation, and Discovery, edn. 2 (Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, N.J., 2005).
19. Wright, G.W. & Simon, R.M. A random variance model for detection of differential gene
expression in small microarray experiments. Bioinformatics 19, 2448–2455 (2003).
20. Smyth, G. Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol. 3, no.1, art. 3 (2004).
21. Baldi, P. & Long, A.D. A Bayesian framework for the analysis of microarray expression
data: regularized t-test and statistical inferences of gene changes. Bioinformatics 17,
509–519 (2001).
22. Verkman, A.S. Drug discovery in academia. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 286, C465–
C474 (2004).
23. Kerns, E.H. & Di, L. Pharmaceutical profiling in drug discovery. Drug Discov. Today 8,
316–323 (2003).
24. Fay, N. & Ullmann, D. Leveraging process integration in early drug discovery. Drug
Discov. Today 7, S181–S186 (2002).

NATURE BIOTECHNOLOGY VOLUME 24 NUMBER 2 FEBRUARY 2006

175

number of available measurements (compounds). We have provided
one example of this principle by using the distribution of sample error
variances to obtain error estimates for individual compounds.
Advances in statistical modeling of HTS data will provide objective
benchmarks against which to compare experimental results and as a consequence help to standardize the hit identification process. By improving
measurement quality and by providing quantifiable false-positive/falsenegative ratios, statistical modeling can improve the efficacy of nonstatistical considerations for lead development (such as counter screens to
identify nonspecific interference). In this manner, the often-cited advice
to identify false leads early and quickly can be strengthened while minimizing potentially costly false negatives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jing Liu and Janie Lapointe for generating the Figure 3 data. This work
was supported by the “Informatics and Chemical Genomics” funding to R.N. under
the Genome Quebec Phase II Bioinformatics Consortium program.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturebiotechnology/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/

