Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Artificial Intelligence Chemistry
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/artificial-intelligence-chemistry

Molecular similarity: Theory, applications, and perspectives
Kenneth López-Pérez a , Juan F. Avellaneda-Tamayo b, Lexin Chen a , Edgar López-López b,c ,
K. Eurídice Juárez-Mercado b , José L. Medina-Franco b,* , Ramón Alain Miranda-Quintana a,*
a

Department of Chemistry and Quantum Theory Project, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
DIFACQUIM Research Group, Department of Pharmacy, School of Chemistry, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Avenida Universidad 3000, Mexico City
04510, Mexico
c
Department of Chemistry and Graduate Program in Pharmacology, Center for Research and Advanced Studies of the National Polytechnic Institute, Section 14-740,
Mexico City 07000, Mexico
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Similarity
Chemical space
Clustering
Fingerprints
Drug Design

Molecular similarity pervades much of our understanding and rationalization of chemistry. This has become
particularly evident in the current data-intensive era of chemical research, with similarity measures serving as
the backbone of many Machine Learning (ML) supervised and unsupervised procedures. Here, we present a
discussion on the role of molecular similarity in drug design, chemical space exploration, chemical “art” gen­
eration, molecular representations, and many more. We also discuss more recent topics in molecular similarity,
like the ability to efficiently compare large molecular libraries.

1. Introduction
Similarity is essential to human cognition because it enables us to
generalize characteristics along a category or to classify items in the
universe according to an ordered array of sets whenever they share a
particular feature [1–4]. The possibility of inferring some knowledge
about a presumptive shared property between two similar items depends
on the mentioned attribute and the preexistent relationship between it
and the shared properties that make the two objects similar [5].
Depending on the particular character studied, similarity is a subjective
reflection of studied objects [6]. These postulates are highly related to
the similarity-property principle widely applied in medicinal chemistry, as
much as in other scientific areas which enunciates that “similar struc­
tural features give rise to similar properties/biological activity”. How­
ever, generalizing shared properties has been employed in chemical
sciences centuries before a consensus on atomic structure [7]. For
instance, to approximate chemical reactivity and physical properties as
criteria that permit categorizing elements or understanding the matter
structure. Whether in Lavoisier’s attempts to complete the rules for
nomenclature in chemistry, or classify bodies by their elements and
compounds they decompose to, and the categorization of those
elementary components between metals and nonmetals [8]; or the reach
for associative relationships of triads, by Döbereiner in a sort of a sys­
tematic classification of “analogous” elements, deducting relationships

on atomic masses preserved in the current periodic table [9]. Enforces
would derive in the current robust but dynamic table of elements, with
twice as many elements as at the time of its postulation one hundred fifty
years ago by Mendeleev. A remarkable fact from this background is the
precise prediction of the chemical and physical properties of unknown
elements for his time, which would be discovered in the next three de­
cades, confirming his suppositions [10].
Similarity is a concept applied systematically in the exercise and
mission of science to explain and categorize phenomena and bodies by
identifying relations among a population [11]. This definition is appli­
cable in fields as diverse as biology taxonomy [12], which is the meth­
odology and principles of systematic arrangements for living and extinct
organisms [13]; etymology, which studies the origin and relationships
among languages through the similarity and root of written and spoken
words, or software sciences, where classification of structures and ar­
chitectures allows a better relationship between academic and industrial
applications of software development [14]. This concept is also obvi­
ously related to that of dissimilarity, since every way of quantifying
similarity could be used to quantify dissimilarity by using an arbitrary
monotonically decreasing function.
In Chemistry, similarity refers to the common functionalities, struc­
tures, composition, spatial disposition, biological activity, and physi­
cochemical properties among different chemical compounds, biological
systems, and macromolecular complexes, among others. Similarity has

* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: medinajl@unam.mx (J.L. Medina-Franco), quintana@chem.ufl.edu (R.A. Miranda-Quintana).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aichem.2024.100077
Received 23 November 2023; Received in revised form 3 August 2024; Accepted 27 August 2024
Available online 31 August 2024
2949-7477/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

become a cornerstone of chemoinformatics [6], which makes it of great
interest to chemists and pharmaceutics, as well as appearing in other
diverse domains (see the following sections). Here, one usually uses
“similarity coefficients” and “similarity indices” in an interchangeable
way, often referring to functions that are bound in the [0,1] interval and
that can be used to quantify the similarity between molecules, not to be
confused with the more general “similarity measure” term, which often
lifts the bound restriction. Based on the similarity-property principle,
similarity becomes one of the main approaches to assessing problems
related to molecular screening in different fields with chemical appli­
cations, giving rise to molecular similarity analysis. It has been largely
demonstrated through the practice that results in similarity, and so on
the similarity concept per se is subjective in the sense that different
representations used in the chemical description and different approxi­
mations to similarity quantitation bring different criteria of similarity
[6,15].

Table 1
Classical molecular representations and descriptors: standard and non-standard.
Endpoint
described

Classic descriptors

Non-classic descriptors

General structureproperty
relationships

• Classical molecular
fingerprints e.g., MACC
keys, PubChem, ECFP.
• Chemical diversity
descriptors e.g.
functional groups and
Bemis-Murko scaffolds.

Specific industrial
applicabilities

• Druglike properties e.g.,
LogP, molecular weight.

ADMET
predictions

• Qualitative ADMET
descriptors e.g.,
Inhibitor of
cytochromes.
• Polarizability.
• Bioactivity e.g.,
enzymatic or cell-grown
inhibition.
• Phenotypic effects.

• Non-classical (and recently
developed) molecular
fingerprints (e.g., MAP4, and
atom pairs).
• Graph-based representations.
• Sequence-based
representations.
• Spectra-based
representations.
• Organoleptic properties (e.g.,
odor or flavor).
• Material properties (e.g.,
conductivity).
• Quantitative ADMET
descriptors (e.g., clearance,
bioavailability, half-life
time).
• Quantum descriptors
• Post-marketing data (e.g.,
drug safety in different
populations)
• -OMICS data (e.g.,
pharmacogenomic or
proteomic data).

2. Molecular similarity
Reactivity
Biological and
bioactive

2.1. Quantification of molecular or system similarity
How to describe a molecule? How to describe a chemical-biology
system, e.g., a small molecule bound to a protein? These are inter­
esting and philosophical questions with multiple correct answers and
have significant implications for molecular design. To address these
questions, firstly, it is essential to answer, “What are the molecular
properties that we want to explore, study, or decode?” Namely, many
descriptors and chemical representations exist that illustrate specific
parts of a molecular dataset’s most complex property, e.g., bioactivity,
that depends on structural, physicochemical, and metabolic features,
etc. Molecular representation and description are at the cornerstone of
basically any computational method. The representation and descriptors
choice will depend on a number of major factors including, but not
limited to, the study’s goals; type of compounds under study e.g., small
organic molecules, peptides, flexible macrocycles, inorganic and metalcontaining molecules, etc.), and number of compounds [16].
Classic and non-classic representations have been extensively used to
decode different molecular features like fingerprints-, scaffolds-, and
graph-based representations that have key differences, and each one is
useful to represent different features of a molecular dataset. For
example, MACCS Keys is one of the most used dictionary-based molec­
ular fingerprints that represent the presence and absence of key func­
tional groups; Extended Connectivity Fingerprints (ECFPs) allow for
representing the spatial distribution and connectivity of each atom in
each molecule in a dataset (see Table 1); Graph-based fingerprints that
allow condense different kind of molecular information in a unique
matrix for each molecule in a dataset like structural, stereochemical,
atomistic, and three-dimensional data.
In parallel, there are classical and non-classical descriptors like druglikeness, ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion, and
Toxic) properties, reactivity, and biological features (Table 1). That has
impacted important molecular design areas, for example, to decode
structure-property relationships (SPRs), reactivity, and biological issues.
For example, drug-likeness and ADMET descriptors have been broadly
used to improve the potency, selectivity, and safety of drugs; Reactivity
descriptors have been used to describe, compare, and predict molecular
mechanisms, chemical reactions, and most stable conformational states;
Biological and bioactive descriptors, e.g., phenotypic, post-marketing, or
-omical data, that allows decoding physiological effects of molecules
against complex biological systems.
Peptides are interesting molecules or “compound systems” that,
mostly depending on their size (few to several and large sequences) are
at the interface between representations typically used in chemo­
informatics (if short amino acids with few amino acids are regarded as
small molecules) or bioinformatics (like sequence-based representa­
tions). However, there is not a unique opinion about the number of

amino acids (molecular weight, or the number of atoms) that must be
considered to use chemoinformatics or bioinformatics representations.
Recently, different authors suggested that peptides lower than 40 amino
acids must be represented using chemoinformatics approaches, and the
higher than must be represented using bioinformatics approaches [17,
18]. However, the authors remark on the importance of establishing a
clear main objective prior to selecting the descriptors used to represent
any molecule.
2.2. The relative and subjective nature of similarity
Representation of a small molecule or molecular system, plus a
similarity metric, is essential to quantify similarity between a pair of
systems. Since the “best” or more appropriate representation depends on
the goals of the comparison itself, for example, the goal of the project,
similarity is strongly subjective. It follows that the real similarity be­
tween any pair of objects/systems is not absolute and it is contextdependent,where the “context” not only is associated with the repre­
sentation or descriptors but also with the “environment” or neighbors”
[19]. Perhaps one of the most straightforward manners to exemplify the
neighborhood dependence of similarity is a two-dimensional (2D) vs.
three-dimensional (3D) similarity assessment. The latter 3D-similarity
also known as 3D superposition has been recently reviewed [20]. The
concept of context-dependent similarity is outlined in Fig. 1A.
It also follows that the similarity between two systems is not neces­
sarily “absolute” in terms of time but it can vary with time (Fig. 1B). In
other words, similarity can be time-dependent. Of course, the time
dependence will be significant if the descriptors change with time. Like
the goals of any comparison, quantifying the evolution with time of the
similarity will depend on the project’s goals. The next section describes
the most common molecule and system representations.
2.3. Representation
Molecular representation has been of common interest for research
in chemistry for at least two centuries. Generally, this is achieved by
using diagrams of element symbols (or vertex of a graph) and sticks
(edges) that represent bonds. This way of representation has also been
an attempt to explain reality, and how atoms join through electronic
interactions to form molecules, as planted by Lewis even before a
2

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Fig. 1. A) Context-dependent system/molecule similarity. Exemplary comparisons of three small molecules highlighting their similarity in substructures and
scaffolds (marked in pink); and their similarity in three dimensions. Adapted from [21]. B) Time-dependent similarity: two objects (systems, molecules) can change
similarity over time, depending on the modifications or changes in the molecular descriptors (lower vs. higher dimensionality). The figure illustrates the hypothetical
similarity and distance between the compounds being compared. The thickness of the pink lines represents the hypothetical structural similarity values.

consensus in the structure of the atoms [22]. Also, a condensed form to
denote the composition of chemical substances, both organic and inor­
ganic, has been accomplished by omitting certain characteristics in
connectivity and geometry [23].
The same procedure has been used in the representation of bio­
molecules such as peptides or proteins, and nucleic acids, by repre­
senting their whole building blocks with a system of well-established
symbols of three letters for amino acids, and one letter for amino acids
and nitrogen bases. In biochemical systems with the participation of
covalent, and moreover non-covalent interactions, the sequence of
building blocks does not explain these interactions. Then, as complexity
increases, representation has to be more complex to achieve a suitable
coverage of structural, electronic, and physicochemical features, which
is a key question in bioinformatics [23].
For organometallic structures, electronic singularities difficult the
issue of representation. Whereas in the case of augmented valances,
chirality around metallic centers, or the limited handling of molecular
geometry, that is why there are specific representations for this kind of

system [24].
However, the computational approach requires the implementation
of a systematic method of input, processing, and storage of chemical
structures, that cover a different degree of chemical properties, e.g.
connectivity, shape, charges, and physicochemical properties, among
others. This approach is accomplished by the representation of mole­
cules through molecular graphs and their posterior transformation by
the implementation of different formats into strings and matrices read­
able by computers. In accomplishing the goal of an adequate chemical
representation, adjusted to a specific research objective, many useful
tools have been developed, some of them more specific or, on the con­
trary, versatile, but with a plethora of different application areas. The
issue of representation has been widely discussed, and recently reviewed
in its application to different fields [23,25,26].
Over the last decades, with the technological advances in computa­
tion, and the development of new methodologies and tools, there has
been a rapid emergence of different and innovative ways to represent
chemical compounds, from small organic molecules to macromolecules,
3

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

and chemical reactions [23]. Some of them are revisited in the next
subsections.

Topological fingerprints are those that represent the connectivity of
the molecules in terms of nodes (atoms) and edges (bonds) [46]. This
kind of description gives rise to a connection table such as SDF and MOL
format, that specifies the nature of the atom, connectivity, bond dis­
tances, atomic eccentricity, and/or weight. Examples of topological
fingerprints are atom pairs fingerprints (APs) [47], topological torsion
(TT) [48], and Daylight fingerprints [49].
There are other types of fingerprints aimed at studying molecular
systems that involve the interaction between two molecules, for
instance, a protein-ligand complex. Examples are pharmacophore fin­
gerprints and protein-ligand interaction fingerprints. Pharmacophore
fingerprints describe the necessary characteristics of the ligand ac­
cording to their possible interactions, and three-dimensional charac­
teristics such as hydrogen bonding, charge transfer, electrostatic, and
hydrophobic interaction sites. Protein-ligand interaction fingerprints
(PLIF) collect information on explicit interactions between protein and
ligands, by describing the bonding amino acid residues present in the
protein site, and geometric disposition [50]. Such 3D information is
provided by molecular docking or experimental results, which are
transformed into 1D bitstrings. Broadly used examples are structural
interaction fingerprints (SPLIFs) [51], and protein-ligand extended
connectivity (PLEC) fingerprints [52].
Shape-based fingerprints are more recently developed and consist of
a description in terms of the probable 3D interacting surface of the
molecule, through the collection of coordinates, and potential interact­
ing types. Some shape-based fingerprints of broad use are rapid overlay
of chemical structures (ROCS) and ultrafast shape recognition (USR)
[53].

2.3.1. Linear notations
Linear notations are one of the most used representations. Those are
cheap in computational resources and space, and with time have been
standardized and widely used, which is the case for Simplified Molecular
Input Line Entry Systems (SMILES) or International Chemistry Identi­
fiers (InChI). They store information in the form of a 1D letter string,
where most of the characteristics of the molecule are implicit by facility,
such as geometry, hydrogen atoms linked to the main chain, and
aromaticity. However, this information can be extracted by following
the precise rules associated with the notation [27]. SMILES have been
the most accepted notation because of its human readability, despite not
being singular for a molecule, it can be easily converted into a canonical
version by implementing consensual rules available in different toolkits
such as RDKit, implemented in the Python programming language [28].
InChI notation has emerged as a solution to the problem of unicity in
1D representation, open-source accessibility, and a big data manage­
ment solution [29]. As SMILES strings, they encode chemical structures
as 1D strings, specifying in their first block the molecular skeleton and
isomerism in the second. InChI notation is not as interpretable by
intuition as SMILES but is also required to SMILES canonicalization
[30]. SMILES Arbitrary Target Specification (SMARTS) has been
developed for partial terms of searching, for which it is possible to use
generic parts of the string to specify a changeable fragment of the
molecules [31].
2.3.2. Molecular fingerprints
Molecular fingerprints consist of the description of properties or
substructures present in the molecules, either by the focused search of
specific and predefined features (dictionary-based fingerprints) or by an
independent and mathematical description of the molecular character­
istics (circular, topological, pharmacophore, protein-ligand interaction,
shape-based, reinforced, and multi fingerprints). This respect has been
recently reviewed and robustly classified [32]. Chemical fingerprints
were developed to relate molecular structural features and physico­
chemical properties, by their inclusion into QSAR equations [33], and
have evolved into one of the most systematic and broadly used meth­
odologies for molecular representation in different computational ap­
plications [34]. Molecular features and chemical descriptors are
included in chemical fingerprints as components of a vector or tuple
which can be handled by computers, and permit the realization of
mathematical transformations [35]. Below are some of the most
important and widely used chemical fingerprint categories and exam­
ples of their specific architectures.
Dictionary-based structural fingerprints, keys fingerprints, or mo­
lecular independent fingerprints, are specified sets of features examined
for in molecules, and their presence (1) or absence (0) is recorded as a bit
vector position. These features can be functional groups, characteristic
substructures, or fragments. The most representative dictionary-based
structural fingerprints are PubChem (PC) [36], Molecular ACCess Sys­
tem (MACCS) [37], Mini FingerPrint (MFP) [38], Barnard Chemistry
Information (BCI) fingerprints [39], and SMIles FingerPrint (SMIFP)
[40].
All the other types of fingerprints consist of dependent architectures.
Those descriptors have a variable number of components, and their
design depends on particular connectivity features of studied molecules,
which makes them more specific and appropriate for complex chemical
structures.
Circular fingerprints are those in which information capturing is
made from a central heavy atom and explores the surrounding neighbors
iteratively, until a complete description of the structural features [41].
Examples of circular fingerprints are Extended Connectivity Finger­
Prints (ECFPs) [42], Functional-Class FingerPrints (FCFPs) [43], Mol­
print2D [44], and Molprint3D [45].

2.3.3. Molecular properties
As structural features, physicochemical and constitutional properties
can be used to describe and represent molecules and sets of molecules,
using continuous and/or discrete features, due to their intrinsic rela­
tionship with structural characteristics. These features are known as
classical molecular descriptors [54]. Their utility in computational
chemistry and chemoinformatics has been widely reviewed recently [55,
56]. Among most classical and relevant descriptors there are tendencies
calculated and studied principally in drug discovery, that empirically
showed a range of acceptability. Those properties are part of empirical
rules to quantify drug-likeness such as the rule of five by Lipinski [57],
and its extension by Veber [58]. Typical properties to quantify
drug-likeness include molecular weight, number of carbon atoms,
number of oxygen atoms, ring systems, count of single or multiple
bonds, number of hydrogen bond donor/acceptors, and the logarithm of
the octanol-water partition coefficient, logP.
2.3.4. Chemical reactions
Transformation of a chemical compound into another following
logical and chemistry-sensed rules of transformation is of central interest
in chemoinformatics and computational chemistry, due to their high
prevalence (more than 150 million records at the time of writing) [59]
and common study, in predictive models, searching, storing, and cate­
gorizing chemical information [60,61]. Common elements of a reaction
such as reactants, conditions, and products, must be included in a
computer-readable format. Some of the most widely employed repre­
sentations of chemical reactions are Reaction SMILES, SMIRKS, and
RInChI, among others.
Reaction SMILES are composed of the representation of reactants,
agents, and products, as SMILES notation, and the reaction arrow sym­
bolized by >. Atoms in molecular representations can be ticked to follow
a specific pattern of displacement along a chemical reaction. This is
achieved by the implementation of numerical indices [62]. SMIRKS
notation is the SMARTS analogous to Reaction SMILES, which can
represent generic reaction patterns. Just exchangeable groups or sub­
structures have to be explicitly represented by SMIRKS, and the rest of
the molecule can be codified by generic symbols. SMARTS are used to
4

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

represent unchangeable generic substructures [31,63].
RInChI uses InChIs to represent molecules implicated in the reaction,
and its layered structure includes information about reaction conditions,
catalyst, and solvent. As the InChI and InChI key, RInChI provides a
standardized and non-ambiguous way to represent chemical reactions
and is very powerful for data management [64]. Additional represen­
tations of chemical reactions are condensed graphs of reaction (CGR)
[65] and bond electron matrices (BE-matrix) [66,67].

chemoinformatics, and theoretical chemistry. For example, using it in
hierarchical clustering [79], molecular encoding [80], decoding the
atomic space of aromatic chemicals [81], and molecular conformal
prediction [82]. Additionally, this kind of approach allows the data
fusion of complex independent data from -omics technologies, physio­
logical, clinical, and chemical outcomes [83]. Which makes been
possible to establish deeper multiple relationships between them.
2.3.6.2. Free-Wilson analysis. Free-Wilson analysis is a common strat­
egy to decode structure-property relationships in molecules, which in­
volves systematically adding substituents around a representative
scaffold. This methodology uses traditional similarity metrics to quan­
tify the R-groups’ similarity in a dataset [84]. Parallelly, the inverse
Free-Wilson analysis, also called “scaffold hopping” [85], allows
decoding the scaffold-property relationships. Namely, in bout cases,
these methodologies have been applied to rationalize properties like
bioactivities, toxicity, clinical outcomes predictions, and other
non-biological molecular properties (e.g., conductivity, solubility, and
reactivity) [86,87]. In this sense, the Free-Wilson analysis offers a
valuable approach to generating systematic clustering and their sys­
tematic classification from large molecular datasets [88].

2.3.5. System representations
The most explored chemical representations have been applied to
small molecules, however, there has been a necessity to develop suitable
depictions for the expression and operation with macromolecules and
more complex systems. Chemoinformatics and bioinformatics have
contributed to this endeavor.
The one-letter abbreviation has been the most common and abbre­
viated linear notation for macromolecules such as peptides, proteins,
and nucleic acids. However, as mentioned before, there are some limi­
tations such as the limited characters of the Latin alphabet, or the lack of
structural information using them, in particular, 3D information.
CHUCKLES and CHORTLES are classical examples of the represen­
tation of macromolecules at sequential and atomic levels. CHUCKLES
consist of an interpreter that translates the peptidic sequence into the
molecular complex SMILES, including covalent interactions along the
chain [68]. Equivalently, CHORTLES is capable of handling oligomeric
mixtures [69]. In both cases, cyclization, branching, or mixtures are
expressed with special characters. In turn, the self-contained sequence
representation (SCSR), uses the V3000 molfile format to record
biopolymer structures in a compressed format, keeping structural de­
tails, and remaining efficient for information management [70]. A more
recent development in the chemical representation of proteins and
biomolecules is the Hierarchical Editing Language for Macromolecules,
or HELM notation language, which is a code at the polymeric level
(SMILES does this at the atomic level), giving rise to a standardized and
unified representation of biomolecules for both bioinformaticians and
chemoinformaticians [71].
Specific examples of macromolecular representations are the web3
unique representation of carbohydrate structures (WURCS), for oligo­
saccharides and polysaccharides with three to twenty monosaccharides
of interest because of their role in biochemical interactions and molec­
ular recognition. WURCS can encode for the main carbon backbone, and
also for modifications and branches in glycans [72,73]. BigSMILES is an
emergent canonical representation for macromolecules such as bio­
polymers, based on SMILES linear notation. BigSMILES has started to be
widely implemented in applications such as big data management in the
study of biopolymers.

2.3.6.3. Fragment merging. Traditionally, similarity-based approaches
involve the systematic study of full chemical structures, their scaffolds,
or their R-groups. However, the fragment merging approach uses algo­
rithms based on empirical rules to generate molecular fragments that
can be compared using traditional methods. Nowadays, this approach
allows the construction of novel and hybrid chemical entities with
optimized properties [89], the identification of structural moieties
related to side effects or other unwanted properties [90], the develop­
ment of more specific similarity searching algorithms, and the
improvement accuracy of de novo design algorithms [91,92]. On the
other hand, these approaches have guided the systematic study around
the similarity of complex molecules like natural products [93], peptides
[94], and antibodies [95], which remarks on their wide applicability.
2.3.6.4. Binary similarity. One of the most popular (and efficient) ways
to evaluate similarity is based on the previously discussed (binary)
fingerprint format [74]. Given two molecules represented as bit-vectors,
then we only need to quantify the number of common “on” bits (a),
common “off” bits (d), and mismatches of on/off bits (b+c). With these
indicators it is then easy to propose a plethora of similarity indices. The
general recipe is pretty simple, we just need a function that satisfies the
following rules: 1) It is bounded in the [0,1] interval, 2) It is mono­
tonically increasing with a and/or d, 3) It is monotonically decreasing
with b+c. Perhaps the quintessential example of this way of working is
the Tanimoto [96] index: a/(a + b + c), which is the most popular such
metric for cheminformatics applications. Nonetheless, other indices, like
Russel-Rao [97], Sokal-Michener [98], Rogers-Tanimoto [96], etc. are
equally valid alternatives. Perhaps nothing better reflects the close
connection between all these alternatives than Tversky’s [99,100] index
which, by tuning a few parameters, can be converted into several other
similarity metrics.

2.3.6. Some classical similarity methods
A large list of hybrid similarity approaches was derived from the
classical metrics and methods to study specific kinds of data [74,75]. For
example, now exist approaches to quantify the similarity of graph-based
networks [75], multiparametric relationships [76], and dynamics pro­
cesses [77]. That demonstrated the increasing usefulness of the concept
of similarity in multiple areas. In the following, we briefly cover other
related topics.

2.3.6.5. Quantum similarity. In a classical contribution, Carbo-Dorca
et al. [101] proposed to use molecular electron density as the inde­
pendent variable in similarity calculations. Supported by the
Hohenberg-Kohn theorems [102,103], this provides a very robust
ground to study relations between different compounds, since the
electron density contains all the information needed to recover all the
properties of any Coulomb system. Apparently limited by the need to
perform a Density Functional Theory calculation (or other, more
expensive, ab initio electronic structure method), the Atomic Shell
Approximation (ASA) [104] makes this a viable option as a screening
tool for moderate-size problems. The vector nature of the electron

2.3.6.1. Fuzzy similarity. This is a classical similarity approach based on
fuzzy logic, a mathematical framework that deals with uncertainty and
imprecision, allowing for the representation of vague or ambiguous in­
formation on a dataset. This kind of mathematical view has introduced
the concept of “partial membership”, which is an element (data) that can
belong to a set to a certain degree rather than being strictly in or out of
the set. Namely, this is one of the most used approaches to quantify the
similarity of diffused datasets [78], and nowadays there are many suc­
cessful applications of these in different areas like bioinformatics,
5

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

density means that it can be used to calculate multiple similarity indices,
including Tanimoto [96], Hodgkin-Richards [105], Petke [106], and
others, with the most prevalent one being the Carbo similarity index
[107], which is nothing more than the cosine similarity between the
densities of the involved molecules. The close connection between the
electron density and the molecular properties has also been exploited in
Quantum QSPR models based on quantum comparative measures [108,
109].

2.3.6.7.3. Constrained similarity. Constrained similarity is an
approach that allows the comparison of entities (e.g., molecules) using
specific and predefined restrictions, in contrast to classical similarity
metrics which do not use additional criteria to filter the input data
[128]. The main use of this kind of similarity is to do intelligent searches
in molecular databases and bibliographic resources. However, recently
their use has extended to generate novel clustering and classification
models based on complex data to identify representative endpoints from
a complex data matrix. For example, this similarity approach has been
employed in cell classification in tissues using -omical data [129] and in
clustering based on ScRNA-seq [130]. Normally, in this kind of meth­
odology the restrictions/filters are used to quantify the similarity as
added previous the similarity calculations, however in iterative pro­
cesses (e.g., de novo drug design) is possible to automatize the selection
of this filter, which is taken advantage of novel artificial intelligence
protocols, like deep reinforcement learning protocols [131]. As
mentioned above, constrained similarity approaches offer the opportu­
nity to filter the input data of each similarity calculation according to the
main goal of each project, reducing the input data variability associated
with the method used to determine it, its quality, complexity, etc.
improving their methodological reproducibility [132].
2.3.6.7.4. Probabilistic similarity. This concept refers to the use of
classic similarity metrics to determine the probability that different
queries are intrinsically related based on their conserved descriptors.
This kind of similarity is commonly visualized as relational networks,
that are particularly useful for constructing putative interactome in­
teractions between different endpoints like genes, proteins, drugs,
therapeutic and side effects, etc. Which have allowed develop protocols
capable of hypothesizing undescribed target-target, drug-target, and
drug-drug interactions [133–136].
2.3.6.7.5. Relational similarity. This kind of similarity uses the
classical similarity metrics to establish relationships between two or
more datasets based on their common descriptors. For example, is
possible to establish relationships between the gene expression changes
associated with the application of different drugs in different cell line
contexts, and through relational similarity is possible to quantify the
overlap between two or more datasets and anticipate a common
outcome [137]. Additionally, relational similarity offers a rational
methodological tool to combine datasets with a unique common feature,
that allows the smart integration of complex information, like -omics
databases [138].

2.3.6.6. Generative models. Generative models were introduced in
recent years as a way of reaching unexplored areas of the chemical space
with the aim of finding high-performing molecules [110]. Since their
breakthrough, there has been a plethora of applied generative models
into chemistry [111]. The concept of similarity has been included in
some reported generative models. A transformer model was created
incorporating Tanimoto similarity as a regularization term in the loss
function [112]. In a study of novel BRAF inhibitors, a transformer model
was combined with transfer learning; the model used the distribution of
the Tanimoto similarity between the generated molecules and the
training data as a criterion to stop epochs. The learning was done until
the similarity distribution showed no improvement [113]. In a recurrent
learning model based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) a scoring 3D
similarity component was introduced.
Similarity has also been used as an evaluation metric for generative
models. For example, in an attention-based generative model for de novo
design, cross diversity was introduced as a new metric [114]. Cross di­
versity is based on Jaccard similarity, and it measures a model’s ten­
dency to explore regions in space [114]. Similarity Nearest Neighbors
(SNN) corresponds to the average similarity of the generated molecule
to its nearest neighbor molecule in the test set. SNN has become a
common metric to use in generative model studies in molecular design
[115–119].
2.3.6.7. Other forms of similarities
2.3.6.7.1. Read across similarity. Commonly, similarity metrics are
constructed using simple representations of chemical structures (i.e., 1D
and 2D fingerprints/features) and a unique similarity coefficient, how­
ever, these classical methods offer a limited form to analyze the simi­
larity of multiparametric aspects from molecular datasets [120]. To
resolve this key limitation new similarity approaches like read across
similarity offer the methodological opportunity to generate combined
similarity indexes. Namely, generating a multiparametric representa­
tion, where different fingerprints and/or n molecular descriptors based
structural keys are combined and assigned with different importance
weights to construct mathematically an index that quantifies the mul­
tiparametric similarity between different queries [120]. This similarity
approach is particularly useful to decode complex biological data like
-omical features, clinical outcomes, and population side effects, addi­
tionally to establish rational fusing protocols to improve the accuracy of
toxicological, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic predictions
[121–123].
2.3.6.7.2. Clustered similarity. This kind of similarity refers to the
use of classical similarity metrics to identify representative clusters in a
dataset using different mathematical algorithms (e.g., k-means, Hierar­
chical clustering, mean shift clustering, agglomerative clustering, etc.).
The main utility of this kind of similarity approach is the rational or­
ganization of clusters, similar compounds will be in a clustered, while
compounds with relative low similarity will be in separate clusters. This
similarity approach is particularly useful for the establishment of pre­
diction of molecular groups in datasets with specific features. For
example, to classify active/inactive, toxic/non-toxic, reactive/unreac­
tive, and natural/synthetic compounds [124–126]. Also, this approach
is one of the most frequently used in bioinformatics studies to establish
phylogenetic, structural, and sequence relationships in proteins and
genes, and to establish pharmacogenomic profiling [127].

3. Applications, practical implications, and implementations
Fig. 2 summarizes schematically various practical applications of the

Fig. 2. Overview of different applications and implications of similarity. The
solid lines represent the relationships between the widely documented areas/
approaches, while the dashed lines symbolize emergent relationships.
6

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

similarity concept. Although the applications can be organized in
various but valid classifications, the applications can be divided
depending on the research area, namely, chemistry, biology, and clinical
applications. The approaches can also be organized into the following
categories in general: similarity searching, database mining, and com­
pound datasets (chemical libraries) profiling that could include the
profiling or analysis of structure-property relationships that, as shown in
this Section, have strong implications in medicinal chemistry [19].
In many practical applications, molecule (chemical) or system sim­
ilarity is extensively used in similarity searching that is founded on the
“similarity principle” [139] if two molecules have similar structures it is
anticipated that they will have similar properties. In drug discovery, the
property is biological activity so the principle can be formulated as
“similar compounds have similar (biological) activity”. However,
well-known exceptions of such principle are the property cliffs: defined
as pairs of compounds with high structure similarity but very large (and
unexpectedly) different properties [140]. The equivalent in drug dis­
covery, “activity cliffs” proposed in 2006 by Maggiora [141] has been
the subject of extensive research in terms of elucidation, implications in
drug discovery, and influence while trying to develop predictive models.
Property and activity cliffs, which arguably can be artifacts of the
experimental assessment to measure the relevant property [142], have
been the subject of several review papers, and the reader is referred to
such publications [143,144]. Similarity searching is extensively applied
in ligand-based virtual screening (comparison of one or more reference
or query compounds vs., a set of molecules in a chemical library; in
target fishing.
One of the implementations of similarity searching is in websites to
perform database mining. Many web-based compound databases in the
public domain have implemented a “similarity search” function where
the user has the option to select or fix a given query chemical structure
and the server/website will provide a set of “similar compounds” based
on a threshold defined by the user (many websites have a filer so the user
can set up a threshold value of similarity). One of the downsides of such
databases is that not always is clear the internal representation used by
the server (a crucial point during the quantification of similarity,Section
1). Table 2 summarizes examples of websites that have an imple­
mentation of similarity searching. The table presents just representative
applications to conduct similarity searches on small molecules and
peptides, and spectra.
Another major implication of molecular similarity is profiling or
characterization of similarity of compound data sets and diversity
analysis [145,146]. Similarity or diversity profiling of compound data
sets is very useful in different areas such as library selection and design
including de novo design of chemical libraries; comparison of similarity
profiles with implications, for instance, in natural product research
(with implications in ecology: assessment of the biodiversity of
ecosystems).
In general, since there are many alternatives to measure similarity
(or distance) (vide supra), Miranda-Quintana et al. have proposed the
Differential Consistency Analysis. It was found that the consensus be­
tween Tanimoto and the Cosine coefficients improved by choosing a
query whose similarity to the rest of the molecules varies less, or by
describing the molecules in a manner that does not depend strongly on
their size [3].

Table 2
Exemplary websites with the implementation of similarity searches.
Website
name

Main application

similarity function

Ref. / URL

ChemSpider

Small molecule and
peptide similarity
searches.

Structure,
substructure, and
scaffolds similarity
searches

http://www.ch
emspider.com/
https://go.drug
bank.com/
https://zinc.doc
king.org/
https://scifinder.
cas.org
https://www.ebi.
ac.uk/chembl/
https://coconut.
naturalproducts.
net/
https://nubbe.iq.
unesp.br/porta
l/nubbe-search.
html
https://www.uni
prot.org/
https://blast.
ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Blast.cgi
https://www.ebi.
ac.uk/Tools/sss
/fasta/
https://www.
rcsb.org/

DrugBank
ZINC
Sci-Finder

Structure,
substructure, scaffold,
and connectivity
similarity searches
Identity, structure,
substructure, scaffold,
and connectivity
similarity searches.
Searches by a range of
continuous properties.

ChEMBL
COCONUT
NuBBE

UnitProt
BLAST NCBI

Peptide and
protein similarity
searches

Sequence and domain
similarity searches

FASTA
Protein Data
Bank
CSEARCH

Searches based
on13C RMN spectra

CFM-ID

Compounds
identification
based on MS
spectra similarity

Sequence, structure,
and chemical
similarity searches
Signals, elements, and
weight similarity
searches
Signal similarity
searches

https://c13nmr.
at/similar/eval.
php
https://cfmid.
wishartlab.com/

essential tools in the pursuit of identifying new compound candidates to
be novel drugs.
Table 3 provides a comprehensive overview of the diverse applica­
tions of similarity in the field of drug design. These applications harness
the power of chemical and structural similarity to expedite the discov­
ery, design, and optimization of drug compounds. From virtual
screening to quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR)
modeling and scaffold hopping, each application is important in
different stages of drug development. The table shows representative
examples and recent advances, showcasing how computational tech­
niques and cheminformatics continue to play a significant role in revo­
lutionizing the drug discovery process, ultimately leading to novel
therapeutic compounds and more efficient drug development pipelines.
Virtual screening focused on similarity is a computational approach
used in drug discovery and chemical research to identify potential hit
compounds with chemical structural similarities. This method aims to
find compounds within a chemical database likely to have similar bio­
logical activities or chemical properties to the reference compound.
Fig. 3 shows a general flow diagram of a similarity-based virtual
screening methodology.
Overall, a similarity-based virtual screening method commences by
selecting a target molecule (generally, an established active compound)
and the compounds contained in a chemical database. Those elements
are commonly represented using molecular descriptors or fingerprints,
which capture important chemical and structural characteristics of these
molecules. Next, a similarity metric is employed to quantitatively
evaluate how similar each compound in the database is to the target
molecule. Many similar metrics like the Tanimoto coefficient, cosine
similarity, Euclidean distance, or other relevant measures can be used to
assess the similarity based on their molecular representations. Conse­
quently, establishing a similarity value threshold or cutoff value is the

3.1. In drug design and discovery
Similarity has an important role in the realm of drug discovery
design, where the quest for novel therapeutic compounds often depends
on identifying molecules that exhibit structural and functional similar­
ities to known drugs or bioactive compounds. Levering similarities
metrics, such as molecular fingerprinting or ligand-based approaches,
by recognizing similarities in chemical structures or biological activities
the process of drug development could be significantly shortened [147].
This approach highlights the crucial role of similarity-based strategies as
7

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Table 3
Selected applications of similarity in drug design.
Application

Description

Methods and tools
used

Key advantages

Representative examples

Ref.

Virtual screening

Identifying potential drug candidates by
comparing the chemical similarity of
molecules to known active compounds.

Molecular docking.

Efficient screening of large
chemical libraries.
Reduces experimental work.

Screening a chemical library
against a target protein using
Tanimoto coefficient

[148,149]

Accelerates drug discovery
process.

Repurposing antiviral drugs for
cancer treatment based on shared
molecular pathways

[150,151]

Building QSAR models using
chemical descriptors and similarity
measures to predict drug
interactions or toxicity profile

[33,152]

Designing new molecules with
improved properties based on
existing scaffolds

[153,154]

Analyzing chemical genomic
datasets to find links between
compounds and biological targets

[155,156]

Molecular docking to assess
structural similarity between
ligands and binding sites
Designing ligands with optimal
binding conformations.

[157,158]

Designing drugs that target specific
proteins

[159,160]

Drug repurposing

Discovering new therapeutic uses for
existing drugs by identifying similarities
between the target and known drugprotein interactions.

QuantitativeStructure Activity
Relationship
(QSAR)

Predicting the biological activity or
toxicity of compounds based on their
chemical structures and similarity
known data.

Scaffold hopping

Designing new drug molecules by
replacing or modifying specific
structural components of existing
compounds while maintaining desired
properties.

Chemogenomics

Integrating chemical and genomic data
to identify relationships between
compounds and target proteins or
pathways.

Ligand-based
methods.
Chemoinformatics
tools like RDKit.
Data mining of
chemical genomic
databases.
Computational
network analysis.
Machine learning.
Molecular modeling.
Machine learning
algorithms.
Descriptor calculation
tools.
Scaffold similarity
metrics
Scaffold analysis.
Chemical genomic
data integration.
Network analysis.
Machine learning.

3D Structural
similarity

Homology modeling:
protein and
peptide design

De novo-design

Comparing the three dimensional
structures of molecules to identify
potential binding sites and interactions
with target proteins.

The concept that proteins and peptides
sharing amino acids sequence similarity
typically exhibit similar structural
characteristics enabling the design of
proteins and peptides with specific
interaction or functions.
Creation of new drug-like compounds
that resemble existing molecules to have
specific pharmacological properties,
leverages the concept that chemical
structures shared with known
compounds could have similar
activities.

Molecular docking
simulations.
Structural alignment
tools.
Protein-ligand
interaction analysis.
Sequence alignment.

Homology modeling.
Model refinement.
Database mining.

Pharmacophore
model.
Compound
generation.

Lower risk and cost compared
to de novo drug development.
Potential for quick clinical
translation.
Enables rational drug design.
Reduces the need for extensive
experimental testing.
Enhances compound
optimization.
Facilitates the discovery of
novel chemical compounds
with known pharmacological
profiles.
Enhances compound diversity
in libraries.
Enables the discovery of new
drug-target interactions.
Provides insights into
compound mechanisms of
action.
Facilitates polypharmacology
studies.
Offers insights into binding
models and interactions.
Enables rational drug design
based on structural data.
Predicts binding affinity more
accurately.
Cost-effective alternative to
experimental structure
determination methods like Xray crystallography.
Yield highly accurate threedimensional structures.
Rapid design of protein and
peptide structures.
Novel drug discovery.

Targeted Drug Optimization.
Reduced cost and time.

further action which sets the minimum acceptable similarity score
required for a compound to be considered a potential hit. Compounds in
the database that surpass the threshold are ranked based on the simi­
larity scores, with those having the highest likeness to the target mole­
cule are given top priority, and are commonly known as potential hits.
To confirm their biological activity, the compounds identified as po­
tential hits through similarity-based virtual screening undergo experi­
mental testing. Experimental validation is a crucial step to verify
whether these compounds indeed exhibit the expected biological ac­
tivity [164]. Metrics to compare similarity of models have been also
reported, showing the importance of similarity assessment not only in
the model development but also the comparison with other models
[165–167].
Virtual screening can be an iterative process. If the initial set of these

Modifying enzymes to perform
specific functions.
AlvaBuilder is capable of
generating novel protein structures
with a focus on structural similarity
to existing proteins
The Schrödinger suite includes
various software tools to explore
chemical space, design novel
compounds, and predict their
binding affinities to target proteins.

[161–163]

hits does not have satisfactory results or further refinement is needed,
the similarity threshold can be adjusted and rerun the virtual screening
or introduce additional criteria to improve hit selection. Confirmed hits
from the experimental validation can be included as new reference
compounds in follow-up iterations.
3.2. Extension to other research areas
The underlying principles of molecular and system similarity have
been extended to several research areas beyond drug discovery. Some of
such extensions are the combination of molecular representations and
indices to profile compound data sets, and toxicology prediction with
similarity approaches, among others, that will be discussed in the
following sections.
8

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Fig. 3. Flow diagram of the general methodology for a similarity-based virtual screening approach.

3.2.1. Composite indexes
Summarizing the previously described representations, some
machine-learning approaches, and indexes have been developed to
classify, punctuate, and group molecules according to different cate­
gories. Examples are natural product likeness, drug-likeness, and syn­
thetic accessibility or feasibility.
The first approach to compute the likeness of a compound to a nat­
ural product set was the Natural Product-likeness Score, developed by
Ertl et al. in 2008, which allows for the comparison of the studied
compounds with natural products according to their representation of
the chemical environment described by molecular fragments, and their
frequency of appearance in molecules, compared to natural products
and synthetic molecules [168]. Some improvements have been made to
this approach, to make it more intuitive, portable, and web-based [169].
However, its architecture remains almost unchangeable.
Machine learning has been broadly included in this respect, for
example, to classify natural products by their predicted biosynthetic
pathway. The first attempt to solve this problem was ClassyFire, which
consists of a computational approach to classify molecules according to
their taxonomies, in base to > 4800 categories, on a set of unambiguous
structural rules, according to the largest structural feature that describes
the compound [170]. A most recent example of this kind of application
is the NPClassifier neural network, which classifies molecules according
to their biosynthetic pathway, superclasses, and classes, recognized by
the natural products research community. This goal is achieved by the
training of the dataset with labeled information about natural products,
described with the counted Morgan fingerprint method for inputting the
structural information, which includes the number of atomic sub­
structures, and not only their presence [171].

Concerning the estimation of a drug-likeness score, many different
approaches have been widely used to compute the similarity of mole­
cules to the known compounds used in the clinic, regarding their
applicability to virtual screening, associated with the necessity of
accomplishing certain parameters or empiric rules, that can dote them
with good pharmacokinetic properties [58,172− 174]. Those indexes
have been developed with different approaches, such as property-based
criteria and machine-learning-based approaches. Property-based
criteria typically follow the Lipinski and Veber rules, developed more
than ten years ago, and there are a variety of different indicators
developed with this strategy [175,176]. However, this approach would
disregard 16 % of currently approved oral drugs, for violating one of
those empirical rules [177]. Consequently, these kinds of filters should
have been improved with the development of quantitative estimations of
drug-likeness (QED), however, evidence suggested that this approach
was unsuccessful [177,178].
Among quantitative approaches to drug-likeness, arises the concept
of “molecular beauty” (albeit beauty is, as similarity, a subjective
concept), as an estimation of the druggability of a biomolecular target by
a chemical compound. The concept tries to integrate the quantitative
approach of composite indicators, with the experience and empirical
attractiveness of molecules, from the point of view of medicinal chemists
[179]. The method consists of ranking compounds on a scale from 0 to 1,
weighting the most relevant physicochemical and structural properties,
to build the index. Each weighting factor is shown to reflect the
importance of that descriptor.
Deep learning approaches have improved the performance of
continuous-scaled methods to estimate drug-likeness. Some of them are
two class classification training methods [178], and unsupervised
9

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

learning [180]. Both of them work by the extraction of structural fea­
tures, either with graph convolutional networks, or recurrent neural
networks, respectively.

them. They also identified previously unreported chemical compounds
that belong to species in this category [187]. Skinnider et al. developed
an open-source algorithm for the specific computation of similarity
among hypothetic natural products. The model is parametrized in the
region of the chemical space occupied by natural products. Their
method, called Library for the Enumeration of MOdular Natural Struc­
tures (LEMONS), employs a representation of circular fingerprints, as
well as a retrobiosynthetic approach, that showed a better performance
than topological and substructure-based fingerprints. By the use of their
method, higher similarity values are assigned to those molecules that
can be subproducts of tailored reactions of other natural products,
making an efficient assignation of biotransformations among natural
products which can be used to taxonomical assignments and research on
biosynthetic relationships [188].
Also, the biosynthetic unexplored chemical space of secondary me­
tabolites from marine prokaryotes has been recently predicted by using
molecular similarity according to their biosynthetic gene clusters, di­
versity, and novelty, predicting the probable metabolites of such path­
ways. Tanimoto similarity was computed with a 1D representation of the
Morgan fingerprint with a radius of 2. By this approach, they clustered
and built taxonomic networks, relating molecules to common sub­
structures, such as scaffolds. Their results showed that 96.8 % of the
secondary metabolome of marine prokaryotes remains unexplored
[189].
In food science, Sánchez-Ruíz and Colmenarejo reported the poten­
tial druggable uses of food chemicals by assessing the similarity co­
efficients of compounds in FooDB, the largest public database of food
chemicals, against compounds in ChEMBL with reported bioactivity
against therapeutic targets [190]. Food-drug interactions, such as
increasing drug metabolism, decreasing availability, or creating adverse
effects, have also been studied by similarity networks. Rahman et al.
reported the creation of a machine learning architecture named FDMine,
which predicts interactions among food and drug compounds, by
computing the closeness of compounds by different approaches of
structural ranking and classification by similarity. Their results showed
more than 80 % of the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC). The FDMine approach was tested in the discovery of
unknown food and drug interactions [191].
Besides drug design, there are many other pharmaceutical and
clinical applications in which the similarity concept plays a key role.
Recently, Ellin et al. reported an algorithm for data mining in
biochemical applications of imaging mass spectrometry employing
extended similarity indices. Results on hyperspectral data across the
studied biological surface (tissue) are processed by principal component
analysis (PCA) to compute scoring and loading values for each m/z peak.
Adopting extended similarity indices, which compare multiple objects
simultaneously [192], they proposed a protocol for comparing multiple
mass spectra with results of imaging mass spectrometry, with better
correlated spectral results, for morphological tissular regions. This
approach permits the difference of biological versus non-biological tis­
sue regions, by determining greater values of similarity among them. It
also represents biological regions with real lipid m/z peak intensities,
that can be rationally interpreted in PCA results [193].

3.2.2. Toxicology
Toxicology prediction of chemical compounds in different fields can
be initially achieved by the comparison and grouping of chemical
structures to those of known toxicological or metabolic reactivity, in
function of their physical or chemical properties (recalling the
similarity-property principle). Toxicity is a property that can trigger
different adverse reactions in the subject and is related to the interaction
of the molecules with the organism, e.g. cell receptors, and its relation is
mediated by specific interactions between molecules, as well as prop­
erties in the chemical entity in the study, categorized in toxicology
among the xenobiotic agents. This approach has been implemented in
many regulatory agencies worldwide to save resources and time in
achieving a first approximation of the chemical safety of a product [181,
182].
Grouping can be achieved by using generic substructural parameters,
common functional groups, and probable breakdown products, among
other characteristics, and criteria depending on the purpose of the
property required to be predicted (i.e., a specific toxically interaction or
adverse reaction). Also, the classification can be assessed by a range of
doses-response, as the criteria to determine either toxicity or safety
[183]. There is a plethora of classic examples of toxicology-related de­
scriptors generalized by similarity approaches, and they need to be
harmonized among different legislations to achieve a unified interpre­
tation of similarity criteria and the regulatory validity of results and
their interpretation. Discussion on this subject is specifically referred to
as the degree of similarity required to consider a compound with
probably the same biological properties as those in the evaluated group
[184].
In silico approaches to assess toxicological information include
structure-based and ligand-based methods. Structure-based methods are
mainly molecular modeling to identify molecular interactions between
compounds and macromolecular targets. Ligand-based methods or readacross focus on large databases of active molecules known to produce an
effect or interact with a specific target, and can be used to compute
physicochemical properties, toxicity, environmental fate, and ecotox­
icity [185]. There are diverse software and web-established tools that
have been developed based on those rules and criteria, with databases of
control well integrated.
3.2.3. Other areas of application
Other areas of common interest have emerged to include the chem­
ical similarity concept among the criteria to preselect chemical com­
pounds to achieve different goals in optimizing biological processes
immersed in human activities.
In environmental chemistry, there has been a recent report in which
they developed a QSAR model and read-across to predict the toxicity of
freshwater binary and multicomponent mixtures containing pharma­
ceutical compounds and pesticides. Their method uses partial least
squares to relate toxicity with composed 2D descriptors including atom
pairs, fragments, and molecular properties. Through cross-validation,
they confirmed the robustness of the model by comparing it with pre­
vious reports [186].
In the dereplication of natural products by using omics techniques,
chemical similarity measures have been largely applied. Athayde et al.
reported the measure of similarity among ten Brazilian species
belonging to the genre of Arnica, according to their metabolomic pro­
files. The dereplication was carried out using LC-MS/MS, and the rep­
resentation used for each species was the m/z signals of each mixture.
Similarity was computed employing different algorithms including
squared Euclidian distance, and k-means clustering. Their study re­
ported the natural product composition profile of the Arnica species, and
their comparison according to the most significant composites found in

4. Visualization of similarity
Similarity is a cornerstone concept in molecular design that allows
the study of SPRs, as well as the generation and exploration of chemical
space. These applications have demonstrated a significant impact in
different areas (vide supra), and their development has accelerated in
recent years [194]. But, similarity is a subjective and “intangible”
concept that ideally can be represented with different visualization
methods, allowing an intuitive representation of the concept. For
example, Table 4 summarizes representative strategies that allow their
visualization and study resolving different kinds of queries.
As shown in Table 4, the similarity principle could be graphically
10

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Table 4
Representative similarity strategies and their applicability domain on molecular
design.
General
similarity
applicability

Specific
similarity
applicability

Similarity
visualization
strategy

Query

Decoding
SPRs

Organization
and annotation
of substructures

SAR maps

Allows the use of
similarity Rgroups to
identify
important
chemical motifs
to rationalize the
studied property
Allows the use of
scaffold
similarity to
identify
important
chemical motifs
to rationalize the
studied property
Allows the use of
molecular pairs
similarity to
identify
important
chemical motifs
to rationalize the
studied property
Allows the use of
molecular
networks
similarity to
identify
important
chemical motifs
to rationalize the
studied property
Allows the use of
sub-structure
similarity to
identify analog
leads series.
Allows the
identification of
“property cliffs”
and “scaffold
hops” of a
specific
endpoint.
Allows the
identification of
“dual property
cliffs” and “dual
scaffold hops”,
and selective
compounds
against one or
two different
endpoints.
Allows the
identification of
“satellite”
molecules that
per se could
represent the
totality of a
dataset
Allows the
identification
and
interpretation of
descriptor
features that
determine
compound

Scaffold tree

SAR matrix

Chemical space
networks*

Constellation
plots*

Data mining:
Identification of
important
molecules in a
dataset

SAS maps

DAD maps

ChemMaps

Quantification
of SPRs

Decodification
of supervised
learning
methods

Table 4 (continued )
General
similarity
applicability

Ref.

Specific
similarity
applicability

Similarity
visualization
strategy

[195]
Quantification
of descriptors
influence

[196]

[197]

[198]

Construction
and
decoding
chemical
space

Dimensional
reduction

PCA
SOM
t-SNE

Data
integration

Ultra large data
visualization

Shinyheatmap

Consensus
similarity
quantification
and
visualization

Consensus
Diversity Plot

Query

activity
predictions
obtained by
machine learning
methods
Allows the
quantification of
the fingerprint
and descriptor’s
influence to
represent SPRs
Allow reducing
the
dimensionality
and the study of
the different
representations
and descriptors
Allows
visualization and
analysis of ultra
large -omical
data
Allows
quantifying the
consensus
similarity of
different datasets
using different
chemical
representations
and descriptors
at the same time

Ref.

[204]

[16]
[205]
[206]

[207]

[208]

*
They could also be classified within the category "Data mining: Identification
of important molecules in a dataset".

[199]

represented using the “chemical space” concept, defined that "An Mdimensional cartesian space in which compounds are located by a set of
M physicochemical and/or chemoinformatic descriptors’’ [16,209].
Namely, is a graphical form to condense and represent high dimensional
molecular data, e.g., from molecular representations and descriptors,
that are interrelated by their similarity. Multiple reviews exist that
remark on their utility and impact on different areas. However, there is
not a unique chemical space representation because this depends on
their molecular representation (or descriptors) and similarity metric
used to construct it. In other words, it is possible to generate numerous
representations of the chemical space for the same chemical data set
[210]. However, a recent data fusion concept named “consensus
chemical space” [211] has shown that it is possible to combine or “fuse”
chemical spaces, improving their power chemical description [212].
Similarity networks are an emerging approach to generate complex
data fusions and similarities comparisons [213], useful to reduce the
data gaps on large and ultra-large datasets from small (i.e., ligands) to
large molecules, i.e., peptides and protein [214,215], and to decode the
three-dimensionality features associated with a specific property [216].
Fig. 4 shows different visualization methods that use the similarity
concept to decode properties, substructures, or global similarities be­
tween compounds or chemical datasets. For example, panel A shows an
example of a classical visual representation of the chemical space that
facilitates the comparison of two compound data sets (each one repre­
sented with blue and red data points). In this example, the compounds
are represented by multiple dimensions and t-SNE is used to project the
multidimensional space into a 2D plot. The visualization in Fig. 4B is an
example of a consensus diversity plot [208] that enables the comparison
of the relative similarity of five data sets based on multiple diversity
criteria: fingerprint-based similarity (X-axis), scaffold diversity (Y-axis),
property similarity (mapped with a continuous color scale; and dataset

[200]

[201]

[202]

[203]

11

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Fig. 4. Examples of visualization methods that use the similarity principle. (A) Dimensional reduction visualization (t-SNE plot); (B) Consensus similarity quanti­
fication and visualization (Consensus diversity plot); (C and D) Data mining visualization of paired compounds (SAS and DAD maps); (E and F) Organization and
annotations of substructures visualizations (constellation plot and chemical space networks). Figures adapted from published studies [206,212,217,218].

size (mapped with the relative size of the data points). Fig. 4C and D are
examples of structure-activity similarity (SAS) [200] and dual-activity
difference (DAD) maps [201], respectively, which are graphical and
quantitative methods to explore the activity landscapes of compound
data sets using pairwise comparisons. SAS and DAD maps enable the
rapid identification of activity, property and selectivity cliffs, as well as
selectivity switches. Fig. 4 C is an example of a Constellation Plot [199]
which is characterized by the visual comparison of the diversity of
analog series (represented by each point in the constellation plot), the

fingerprint-based similarity of the analog series, plus the amount of
compounds populating each series (indicated with the data point size).
The continuous color scale facilitates mapping an additional property e.
g., biological activity value. Fig. 4F is an example of a molecular simi­
larity by network to explore the SAR of compound data sets and, like SAS
and DAD maps, rapidly identifying activity cliffs [217].

12

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

4.1. Representation of chemical space as works of art

acceptor (HBA) and rotatable bonds (RB). Fig. 5B illustrates the
“transformation/translation” of the same visualization into a digital
painting or artwork. As discussed elsewhere, despite the fact AI is
increasingly used in digital artworks, visualizations of chemical spaces
are ultimately driven by the concept of molecular similarity.

Beyond providing chemical information, visual representations of
the chemical space and chemical multiverses can also convey an artistic
meaning or expression, that, in turn, might help in the efforts of edu­
cation in chemoinformatics and scientific dissemination. The authors
recently proposed a natural extension of cheminformatics in art through
artistic representations of chemical spaces [219] and generated an
exemplary Chemical Space Art Gallery publicly available (https://www.
difacquim.com/chemical-art-gallery/) [219]. Fig. 5 shows a represen­
tative visualization of the chemical space. Fig. 5 A illustrates a typical
scientific representation of the chemical space of a database of 120 di­
etary chemical compounds with reported epigenetic activity in a
t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) visualization. The
dietary compounds are divided in two groups: 1) the compounds with
reported activity vs DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and 2) not re­
ported activity vs DNMT1. As with many visual representations of the
chemical space, the interpretation is driven by the similarity relation­
ships between the chemical properties, in this example, the properties
employed for the two-dimension reduction analysis were: octanol-water
partition coefficient (SlogP), topological polar surface area (TPSA),
molecular weight (MW), hydrogen bond donor (HBD), hydrogen bond

5. Extended similarity
Until this point of the review we have discussed the similarity
measurements in a pairwise manner. While obviously important, this
paradigm can be less-than-ideal when we want to analyze very large
libraries. Recently, the extended similarity framework was introduced to
the field with the goal of alleviating this problem [192,220]. Extended
similarity allows the comparison of multiple molecules at the same time,
yielding a similarity value for the whole dataset. For a set of N molecules
represented by binary fingerprints of size M, we will have a matrix N ×
M. The first step to get to the extended similarity value is to sum the
∑
matrix column wise to get a vector
= [σ1 , σ2 , …, σM ]. With the pur­
pose to identify how each column sum, σk , contributes to the similarity
or dissimilarity of the set, we will define the quantity Δσk = |2σk − N|. We
then define a coincidence threshold, γ, that will help to classify each
column according to how uniformly distributed the elements of a bit

Fig. 5. A) t-SNE visualization of a dietary database comparing epigenetic activity against DNMT1, using drug-like descriptors. B) Art work of chemical compounds
generated from panel A information.
13

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

position are. The classification rules are: i) if 2σk − N > γ it will be a
1-similarity column, ii) if N − 2σ k > γ it will be a 0-similarity column, iii)
otherwise it will count as dissimilarity. The final step is to weigh the
cases in which we have a partial coincidence (not all the elements are
0 or 1). Conveniently defined weighting functions can be defined to take
this non-perfect coincidence into account for partial similarity, fs , and
for partial dissimilarity, fd . Examples of used weighing functions are:

indices can be used to compare the diversity of two libraries by taking
their absolute and relative differences, to then use a sigmoid function to
compare if a set is less or more diverse in reference to other [215].
Inspired on Chemical Space Networks (CSNs) [198,224] and with the
help of extended similarity, Chemical Library Networks (CLNs) were
developed to explore the inter use extended similarity indexes to find the
interconnections between libraries’ diversities. To generate the CLNs the
⋃
extended similarity of the union of two sets (se (A B)) was calculated
with a constant coincidence threshold (γ). Then taking each library as
node, all the possible edges are generated; then edges are pruned based
on if the extended similarity of the union of those two sets is below an
edge-threshold. By increasing the edge-threshold one can find the most
important diversity connections and find a central library in a set of li­
braries. The same process can be repeated without edge pruning and
changing the coincidence threshold when calculating the extended
similarity of the set’s union; and using the extended similarity as mea­
surement of the magnitude of the connections [215]. CLNs have been
used in a chemoinformatic analysis of libraries focused on epigenic
targets. In this study two libraries of 11 were identified as the centers of
the network, these two libraries were also the least diverse ones [225];
also for study of DNA-encoded libraries [226]. Figs. 6-8
One of the major advances on the extended similarity was advancing
beyond binary vectors and generalizing it for categorical [227] and
continuous [228] numerical variables. For the latter case, three variants
were proposed for the processing of numerical continuous data, for all
scaling of the data between 0 and 1 needs to be done a priori. The first
variant based on the sum of the absolute difference of values and the
⃒
⃒
mean value of its column ⃒xij − xj ⃒, the second one is similar to the first
⃒
⃒
one but now doing 1 − ⃒xij − xj ⃒, and the third variant only calculates the

(
) Δσ
fs Δσk = k
N
(
)
Δσ k −
fd Δσk = 1 −

Nmod2
N

The mentioned steps can lead to a generalization of pairwise indices.
For example, the commonly used Jaccard-Tanimoto index is trans­
formed in the following way:
)
∑ (
fs Δσk
a
∑
∑s
→sJT = 1−
sJT =
a+b+c
1+ 1
1− s

d

Note how the a counter transforms in a summation over the 1-similar
counters and the dissimilar counters, b and c, into the respective sum­
mation over the dissimilarity columns. This same transformation can be
done for any similarity index. The major advantage of extended simi­
larity indices is that it can calculate the overall similarity of a set much
more efficiently than by using the traditional pairwise comparisons.
With the later methodology, one would need to perform N(N-1)/2
comparisons, which scales as O(N2). With the extended similarity
framework, the scaling is linear, O(N), and as such, dramatically more
efficient. This fact opens the door for a plethora of applications for
extended similarity measurements [192,220].
One of the most popular ways of picking a diverse set of molecules
from a bigger set is the MaxMin [221] algorithm. In this method starting
from a random first molecule, the pairwise comparison of the picked
compounds and the not picked compounds is computed; the selected
compound will be the one with the smallest value for the biggest simi­
larity between itself and the selected compounds. This procedure iter­
ates until the desired number of molecules is picked. The whole method
is computationally costly for large number of molecules. A method
inspired by the MaxMin algorithm but using extended similarity was
developed, named Max _nDis. Starting from a random molecule, the next
compound to pick will be the one that minimizes the extended similarity
when it is added to the set of already picked molecules; it continues until
the desired number of molecules is reached. The Max _nDis method was
proved to be faster and superior method for diversity selection in various
datasets; overall the similarity of the picked molecules was always lower
than the ones picked with the traditional methos [220]. Extended sim­
ilarity was used as a performance metric of novel sorting genetic algo­
rithms, NSGA-II and NSGA-III, for small-molecule optimization; an
example on how it can be used as a metric for chemical diversity [222].
The extended similarity framework can also be used to gain infor­
mation about particular objects in a set. If we calculate the extended
similarity on a set excluding one molecule, we get the complementary
similarity for that object. The object with the lowest complementary
similarity will be the one most similar to the rest of the set, meaning that
it will be medoid of the set. Hence, the object with the highest com­
plementary similarity will be the outlier (least similar to the rest) of the
set. Ranks based on complementary similarity can help to sample re­
gions of interest of the set. To retain the linear scaling, one can simply
subtract the binary vector corresponding to the object, vi = [0, 1, …, 0],
∑
from the column wise sum vector
= [σ 1 , σ2 , …, σM ], resulting in a new
vector vi − Σ. If we apply the same extended similarity algorithm on this
vector we get the complementary similarity value, and retaining O(N)
scaling even if we do it for all the set [223].
Another application of extended similarity indexes to diversity is to
find relations between large chemical libraries. The extended similarity

sum over the scaled data. In all three cases coincidences measurements
are calculated to classify the columns as high-content similarity,
low-content similarity or dissimilar [228]. The selection of descriptors is
key for Quantitative Structure-Activity/Property Relationship
(QSAR/QSPR) models [229]. Extended similarity provides a flexible
similarity calculation that can help find the normalization method,
coincidence threshold, descriptors and coincidence variant that can
separate the similarity of the two groups of compounds the best, for
example active and inactive compounds. Applied on a cytochrome P450
2C9 data set, the just explained framework was used select the contin­
uous descriptors that separate the similarity of the inactive and active
ligands; by comparison the inactive compounds have a smaller similarity
than the active [228]. Extended similarity was also used to evaluate
created molecular fingerprints from physicochemical data, this was
done as a proof of concept for a set of 13 physiologically active com­
pounds [230].
Activity cliffs correspond to molecules that are highly similar but
have a big difference in a given property. An approach to quantify the
activity cliffs in a set is the SALI (Structure-Activity-Landscape-Index)
index:
⃒
⃒
⃒Pi − Pj ⃒
SALI(i, j) =
1 − s(i, j)

As it can be appreciated is a pairwise comparison, hence, to quantify
the activity landscape of a whole set would require N(N-1)/2 compari­
sons. To diminish the computational cost, eSALI was introduced, as
given on equation 5. It can be appreciated that the operations required
to get the eSALI index scale O(N). This new metric serves to quantify the
landscape’s roughness and modelability of the set with the given rep­
resentation [15].
∑
1
|Pi − P|
eSALI(M) =
N 1 − se (M)
Another field that extended similarity can be used as tool is chemical
space exploration. With the pairwise similarity matrix of the compounds
in a library one can do a PCA to visualize the chemical space, however, is
14

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Fig. 6. CLNs using RDKit fingerprints with a constant coincidence threshold with (A) all edges and pruning edges at thresholds (B) 0.1, (C) 0.2, and (D) 0.3 for 19
chemical libraries [215].

Fig. 7. CLNs using RDKit fingerprints with all edges calculated with (A) minimum coincidence threshold, and coincidence thresholds of (B) 30 %, (C) 70 %, and 90 %
of the number of elements in the set’s union for 19 chemical libraries [215].

a computationally costly task. ChemMaps is an alternative that uses only
a certain portion of the compounds, satellites, that yields a visualization
where the distances and form resemble the one with the complete matrix
[202]. With complementary similarity calculations it is possible to select
the satellites from the medoid and/or periphery region or uniformly. In
this way we can identify regions of the library’s chemical space that are

key to sample to have a good ChemMap. Fig. 3 shows one example of a
ChemMap [231].
Imaging mass spectroscopy has also benefited from extended simi­
larity. Mass spectra can be converted to binary fingerprints, using PCA to
identify high, mid and low correlation pixels extended similarity is used
to decide if the pixel corresponds to a biological structure or not. With
15

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Fig. 8. ChemMap of NuBBE [cite] library ECFP4 fingerprint using 25 % as satellites sample with medoid-periphery alternations [231].

extended similarity medoid spectra can also be extracted to represent
groups picked by PCA and help aid the imaging interpretation. It also
shows potential applications to the grouping of correlated regions in the
tissue by picking important pixel groups from the beginning, com­
plementing PCA calculations [193].

atoms in the trajectory. However, this can be challenging because con­
figurations need to be aligned to some reference(s) to minimize the ef­
fect of local rotations and translations during a simulation and the
decision of what reference(s) to align to can impact your data analysis
significantly [234,235]. To circumvent this limitation, distances, di­
hedrals, or angles of atoms in every frame, is another way to represent
biomolecules [236]. Alternatively, there have been many methods of
representing protein-ligand interactions in fingerprints. Structural based
protein-ligand interaction fingerprints encode interaction in binary
vector. Each residue is encoded in a vector, which consists of informa­
tion such as hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, aromatic
stacking, ionic bond, the distance/angle of the interaction, and the
atoms and residues involved [51,237]. PROLIF is software for gener­
ating fingerprints for representing molecular interaction between com­
bination of protein, ligand, RNA, and DNA molecules, which is
compatible with MD trajectories, docking, and experimental structures
[238]. Energy-based interaction fingerprints can be useful to understand
the intermolecular interaction during the dissociation mechanism when
a ligand is dissociated from a protein [239]. The interaction fingerprint
would be useful if you need cluster binding different modes of the
protein-ligand complex, starting ensemble for docking, and dissociation
mechanism studies.

6. Molecular similarity in molecular dynamics simulations
The importance of molecular comparisons, and the ever-present need
to develop more efficient algorithms to perform them is particularly
evident in the field of Molecular Dynamics (MD), a computer simulation
method for studying systems’ dynamics by integrating Newton’s 2nd
Law. Although the advent of graphical processing units has made
microsecond timescale MD simulations a routine, simulation postprocessing analysis failed to keep pace with the increasing size of
simulation datasets [232]. Here, comparisons are important mainly for
their role in unsupervised learning techniques. This has been crucial in
this area, enabling dimensionality reduction for faster analysis and the
grouping of similar samples through clustering. Unlike supervised
learning, unsupervised learning relies solely on input information to
extract patterns and structures, making it useful for uncovering insights
in complex datasets. Unsupervised learning has a versatile of applica­
tions to discover patterns, anomalies, and relationship within data. In
Molecular Dynamics, defining collective variables (CV), which are a set
of pre-defined features that guides enhanced sampling, is a challenge
because they are highly sensitive to user choices and require dimension
reduction techniques for accurate representation [233]. CV that repre­
sents the metastable states of the systems’ dynamics is more likely to
find the path of the slow modes in protein or protein-ligand dynamics.
In the following section, we will talk about how to select features for
representing the protein or protein ligand systems, dimension reduction
techniques for representing high-dimensional data, different clustering
methods, and lastly, examine the role of extended similarity in Molec­
ular Dynamics analysis.

6.2. Dimension reduction techniques
With an increasing surge of data, strategies to project highdimension data into low-dimension data for data analysis are needed
to process the data using the least amount of information. Dimension
reduction (DR) is critical in clustering, or the classification of similar
data into its own group. It can not only reduce the computational cost of
clustering but can also trim the noise of data, which can improve the
accuracy of clustering results. DR is not limited to applications of clus­
tering; it also has applications in Molecular Dynamics in areas such as
enhanced sampling and building Markov State Models (MSM). For ap­
plications to enhanced sampling, a good low-dimension projection of the
data is needed to characterize collective variables (CV), which can better
guide the enhanced sampling to bias potential to the Hamiltonian of the
system or be used to build an MSM [240]. Dimension reduction is
divided into linear and nonlinear.

6.1. Featurization
Featurization is the selection of the most represented features of a
data. The most intuitive features would be the spatial coordinates of
16

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

Linear dimension reduction methods are helpful to define collective
variables as they create a linear combination of the most important
principal components. Principal component analysis (PCA) [241] is the
most widely used dimensional reduction technique that reduces to
2-dimensional space by projecting the multi-dimension data while pre­
serving the variation of the data. The eigenvector with the highest
eigenvalue will be your first PC. It will identify the principal compo­
nents, which are orthogonal linear combination of the variables. Similar
to PCA, time-independent component analysis (tICA) [242] projections
involves a linear transformation of the input data, aiming to maximize
the autocorrelations in the output data. Because of this, it is widely used
in applications to MD because it identifies the slow motions in an MD
simulation, while preserving kinetic information [240,243]. Both PCA
and tICA has been to build MSM and in a study conducted to compare
the performance of both techniques, both were able to enhance the
performance of MSM [243]. However, it is noted that both methods
suffer significantly with an increase in dimensions. Nonlinear DR tech­
nique includes t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)
and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) map
distances or similarities between data point in high-dimensional space to
a low-dimensional space. Therefore, it preserves the relationships and
structures based on how close or similar points are.
In one study comparing 2D and transcriptomics datasets, t-SNE and
UMAP are better at preserving local structures (preservation of neigh­
bors), while PCA is better at preserving global structure (relative posi­
tion of different clusters) and less sensitive to parameter choices [244].
A similar sentiment is shared in a MD simulation, in which PCA and tICA
perform the best to capture the slow modes of protein dynamics and the
free energy surface of small peptide and protein [245− 247]. While
t-SNE preserves similarity between high- and low-dimensional space, at
the same time, it performs poorly in extraction of global structures.
Alternatively, it was found that UMAP overall not only performs better
in retaining kinetic information and Cartesian coordinates than t-SNE,
PCA, and tICA [240], but also performs better in MSM and able to
resolve more metastable states [248]. All methods have their advantages
and limitations, and the choice of how many dimensions is needed,
choice of parameters, preprocessing steps, and DR technique choice is
system dependent and requires careful decisions.

Another major pitfall is the decision how many clusters to pick. This is
not a trivial task due to the complex nature of MD simulation. Users
would require prior knowledge about the system to make a reasonable
conjecture. Due to its partitioning nature of assigning points to its closest
centroid, its cluster shapes are mainly uniform and highly sensitive to
outliers. K-means is more useful for data that is well-separated.
K-medoid follows the same algorithm as K-mean with the main differ­
ence being that pairwise comparison has to been to calculate the simi­
larity between every point to determine the least dissimilar object,
marking the time complexity to be O(k * N2 * i).
Hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) creates a cluster for
every individual and begins merging similar clusters together. There are
several common merging techniques. Single linkage merges clusters
based on the distance between the two closest points of two clusters.
Complete linkage merge clusters based on the maximum distance be­
tween two clusters. Centroid linkage merges clusters based on the dis­
tance between the two closest centroids of two clusters. Average linkage
merges clusters based on the average distance between all combination
of points of two clusters. Average linkage and centroid perform the best
as it not only produces compact and different clusters, but also identify
different shapes and sizes; this come with the pitfall of being most time
intensive [250]. Although computationally efficient, single linkage
tends to add long tails of data to one cluster [251] and complete linkage
tends to have smaller clusters. Some advantages of HAC include: no prior
knowledge needed on number of clusters; parameter independent. Some
limitations of hierarchical include: a time complexity of O(N2) due to the
pairwise similarity computed at every iteration [245,252], sensitivity to
outlier, and variant to permutation in the data [250].
Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
(DBSCAN) [253] alleviates some of the pitfalls in K-means, which is the
inability to partition noisy data, limited to globular clusters and similar
shaped clusters, and the need to specify number of clusters. DBSCAN is a
density-based clustering method that can identify highly dense regions
and clusters of arbitrary shapes and can identify metastable state [249].
DBSCAN takes in two parameters to define density, radius for forming
epsilon neighborhoods and minimum number of samples. DBSCAN is a
density-based algorithm. First every point will form their epsilon
neighborhoods for all the samples within a radial threshold. Epsilon
neighborhood that meets the minimum number of samples will be
considered a core sample of high density. Then a random core point is
chosen to begin the first cluster. Samples in its epsilon neighborhoods
will be included in the first cluster and the samples on the cluster pe­
riphery will look for overlapping epsilon neighborhoods until there are
no more epsilon neighborhoods. Lastly, points close by to the first
clusters will also be included in the cluster. This process will continue for
other clusters. This process will be able to distinguish high- and
low-density regions. How does it affect MD trajectories? Using only
these two criteria for clustering, it can lead to small clusters and be
susceptible to noises. There DBSCAN requires a careful selection of pa­
rameters as it is very sensitive to epsilon and the minimum number of
points. In addition, density-based clustering suffers from a large per­
formance cost with the best time complexity to be O(nlogn) [254] and
the worst time complexity of O(N2), every point needs to be compared to
every other point to find its neighbors [255]. This can come as a cost
when data is high dimensional.
Although DBSCAN is susceptible to noise. It can fail in a dataset with
varying densities, or the data is highly complex. Therefore, HDBSCAN
[253] is an extension to DBSCAN as hierarchical method that can
combine clusters to determine the optimal number of clusters based on
the stability of the clusters. DBSCAN requires a static threshold as the
input. However, HDBSCAN uses a range of different thresholds at every
iteration and can form or merge clusters depending on the hierarchical
structure [256]. This improves DBSCAN by the dissolution of the epsilon
parameter. The pitfall of DBSCAN lies in its sensitivity to parameters,
which requires tests. HDBSCAN overcame this limitation by involving
methods that try out all possible thresholds and produce high-density

6.3. Clustering
Clustering is the grouping of similar samples together, which is
essential for unraveling protein folding dynamics, constructing Markov
State Models, enhancing Replica Exchange simulations, and discerning
drug binding modes. Root-mean square deviation (RMSD) is a widely
used pairwise metric for calculating similarity between configurations in
Molecular Dynamics simulations and popular among clustering metrics.
Below we will investigate several widely used algorithms, which differ
vastly in their approaches, time complexity, sensitivity to outliers, pa­
rameters, and effectiveness. It is dependent on the preprocessing de­
cisions, parameter chosen, metric for comparison, and algorithm
chosen.
K-means is known to be the most popular partitioning clustering
algorithm and its input requires two parameters, the number of cen­
troids, and initial estimate of centroids. From these starting initial
centroid estimates, it assigns each point to the closest centroid, and
recomputing the centroid of the newest formed clustering. This process
is iterated until convergence, when the computed centroid remains the
same and the points remain in the same clusters. When applied to Mo­
lecular Dynamics, it proves to be efficient as it has a time complexity of
O(k * N * i), k for number of cluster, n for number of point, and i for
number of iteration. However, it fails to identify key metastable states
and fails short for non-convex cluster shapes [249]. In addition, k-means
clustering is dependent on the initial centroid estimation. In the stan­
dard method of initiating centroid, k-means++, it picks a random point
and picks the maximally distant points for the k number of clusters.
17

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

clusters.

draft, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data curation. Lexin Chen:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization,
Formal analysis, Data curation. Juan Avellaneda Tamayo: Writing –
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Formal anal­
ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Kenneth Lopez Perez: Writing –
original draft, Visualization, Formal analysis, Data curation. Ramon
Alain Miranda Quintana: Writing – review & editing, Writing – orig­
inal draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investi­
gation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Jose Luis Medina Franco: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. K. Euridice Juarez Mercado:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Data
curation.

6.4. Extended similarity in MD simulations
Extended similarity indices were able to distinguish conformations
for a protein folding mechanism. It successfully identified two distinct
protein folding pathways with hierarchical agglomerative methods
[223]. However, because extended similarity indices were computed for
a binary vector input in the form of a contact map, this is effectively
scaling O(N2), which means more computation in the preprocessing step
to featurize the data to be compatible with extended similarity indices.
The feature selection, as discussed previously, is highly dependent on
the system and requires prior knowledge.
Extended continuous similarity is an extension to extended similar­
ity. It takes the Cartesian coordinates, matrix of number of samples or
frames times number of features, as the input for comparisons [228,
232]. The samples will be condensed into a single vector containing the
column-wise sum of features for all the samples. For matrix of Cartesian
coordinates to be compatible with extended similarity indices, it needs
to be normalized between [0,1] to accommodate the range of most
cheminformatics metrics. To do this, we normalize between the mini­
mum and maximum of the coordinates, which is to be compatible with
the ranking of RMSD calculations.
Build efficient and general clustering algorithms. Root-mean-squaredeviation (RMSD) is the main tool for calculating the similarity of MD
frames due to its straightforward implementation. However, it has
limitations as a gauge in cluster conformation; it compares in pairs,
effectively making it an O(N2) algorithm; and this similarity metric is
influenced by other parts, especially ligands or flexible regions. fraction
of candidates from high-density regions in the data, then use our di­
versity algorithms (Max_nDis, ECS_MeDiv) to select representative cen­
troids at a linear scale [220]. Diversity selection builds upon ideas from
extended similarity. First it selects a seed or the starting point for di­
versity selection. Then it iterates through the data and picks the next
point that gives the maximum extended similarity. This method not only
provides a method of identifying a diverse set of distinct conformations,
but it is also deterministic and linear scaling [232]. From this study,
frames in a MD simulation are more diverse when selected with the
diversity algorithms than using RMSD.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
RAMQ, KLP, and LC thank the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences of the National Institutes of Health for support under award
number R35GM150620. JLMF thanks DGAPA, UNAM, Programa de
Apoyo a Proyectos de Investigación e Innovación Tecnológica (PAPIIT),
Grant No. IG200124.
References
[1] R.A. Miranda-Quintana, T.D. Kim, F. Heidar-Zadeh, P.W. Ayers, On the
impossibility of unambiguously selecting the best model for fitting data, J. Math.
Chem. 57 (7) (2019) 1755–1769, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10910-019-01035-y.
[2] R.-A. Miranda-Quintana, R. Cruz-Rodes, E. Codorniu-Hernandez, A.J. BatistaLeyva, Formal theory of the comparative relations: its application to the study of
quantum similarity and dissimilarity measures and indices, J. Math. Chem. 47 (4)
(2010) 1344–1365, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10910-009-9658-6.
[3] R.A. Miranda-Quintana, D. Bajusz, A. Rácz, K. Héberger, Differential consistency
analysis: which similarity measures can be applied in drug discovery? Mol. Inf. 40
(7) (2021) https://doi.org/10.1002/minf.202060017.
[4] K.J. Holyoak, R.G. Morrison, The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and
Reasoning, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[5] E. Heit, J. Rubinstein, Similarity and property effects in inductive reasoning,
J. Exp. Psychol. Learn Mem. Cogn. 20 (2) (1994) 411–422, https://doi.org/
10.1037/0278-7393.20.2.411.
[6] R. Sheridan, S. Kearsley, Why do we need so many chemical similarity search
methods? Drug Discov. Today 7 (17) (2002) 903–911, https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1359-6446(02)02411-X.
[7] M.P. Crosland, The use of diagrams as chemical ‘equations’ in the lecture notes of
William Cullen and Joseph Black, Ann. Sci. 15 (2) (1959) 75–90, https://doi.org/
10.1080/00033795900200088.
[8] American Chemical Society, Academie des Sciences de l’Institut de France;
Societe Francaise de Chimie, The Chemical Revolution, Paris, 1999.
(9]J.W. Döbereiner, Versuch Zu Einer Gruppirung Der elementaren stoffe nach ihrer
analogie, Ann. Phys. 91 (2) (1829) 301–307, https://doi.org/10.1002/
andp.18290910217.
[10] D. Mendeleev, On the relationship of the properties of the elements to their
atomic weights, Z. F. üR. Chem. 12 (1869) 405–406.
[11] N.C. Chung, B. Miasojedow, M. Startek, A. Gambin, Jaccard/Tanimoto similarity
test and estimation methods for biological presence-absence data, BMC
Bioinforma. 20 (S15) (2019) 644, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-3118-5.
[12] P.K. D, V.G. Rao K, Generalized weighted tree similarity algorithms for taxonomy
trees, EURASIP J. Inf. Secur 2016 (1) (2016) 12, https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13635-016-0035-2.
[13] Q.D. Wheeler, Taxonomic triage and the poverty of phylogeny, Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 359 (1444) (2004) 571–583, https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2003.1452.
[14] E. Engström, K. Petersen, N. bin Ali, E. Bjarnason, SERP-Test: a taxonomy for
supporting industry-academia communication, Softw. Qual. J. 25 (4) (2017)
1269–1305, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11219-016-9322-x.
[15] T.B. Dunn, E. López-López, T.D. Kim, J.L. Medina-Franco, R.A. MirandaQuintana, Exploring activity landscapes with extended similarity: is tanimoto
enough? Mol. Inf. 42 (7) (2023) https://doi.org/10.1002/minf.202300056.

7. Conclusions
Molecular similarity is a general but subjective concept whose
quantification has many practical applications including molecular
modeling, drug discovery, organic, analytical, natural products, food,
environmental chemistry, among many others. Overall, molecular sim­
ilarity provides a systematic way to chart and explore quantitatively the
constantly increasing chemical space. In addition to the scientific and
chemistry applications of similarity, it also provides a basis to generate
chemoinformatic and chemical space-driven artistic representations
that, in turn, helps as way of education and dissemination of science.
Despite the fact there is significant progress toward the theory and
application of molecular similarity, there are still challenges to address.
As molecular similarity strongly depends on molecular representations,
development of novel and accurate ways to represent chemical struc­
tures is a continued research area. It is still challenging to accurately
represent areas of chemical space that are outside of the traditional
medicinally relevant chemical space, for instance, metal-containing
compounds and metallodrug candidates, especially for large libraries.
Also, in the current era of large and ultra-large chemical libraries, it is
crucial to implement fast and accurate ways to compute molecular
similarity.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Edgar Lopez Lopez: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
18

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

[16] J.L. Medina-Franco, N. Sánchez-Cruz, E. López-López, B.I. Díaz-Eufracio, Progress
on open chemoinformatic tools for expanding and exploring the chemical space,
J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 36 (5) (2022) 341–354, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10822-021-00399-1.
[17] E. López-López, O. Robles, F. Plisson, J.L. Medina-Franco, Mapping the
structure–activity landscape of non-canonical peptides with MAP4 fingerprinting,
Digit. Discov. 2 (5) (2023) 1494–1505, https://doi.org/10.1039/D3DD00098B.
[18] F. Plisson, O. Ramírez-Sánchez, C. Martínez-Hernández, Machine learning-guided
discovery and design of non-hemolytic peptides, Sci. Rep. 10 (1) (2020) 16581,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-73644-6.
[19] G. Maggiora, M. Vogt, D. Stumpfe, J. Bajorath, Molecular similarity in medicinal
chemistry, J. Med Chem. 57 (8) (2014) 3186–3204, https://doi.org/10.1021/
jm401411z.
[20] S.M.N. Hönig, C. Lemmen, M. Rarey, Small molecule superposition: a
comprehensive overview on pose scoring of the latest methods, WIREs Comput.
Mol. Sci. 13 (2) (2023), https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1640.
[21] E. López-López, O. Rabal, J. Oyarzabal, J.L. Medina-Franco, Towards the
understanding of the activity of G9a Inhibitors: an activity landscape and
molecular modeling approach, J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 34 (6) (2020)
659–669, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10822-020-00298-x.
[22] G.N. Lewis, The atom and the molecule, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 38 (4) (1916)
762–785, https://doi.org/10.1021/ja02261a002.
[23] L. David, A. Thakkar, R. Mercado, O. Engkvist, Molecular representations in AIdriven drug discovery: a review and practical guide, J. Chemin.-. 12 (1) (2020)
56, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-020-00460-5.
[24] J.C. Brammer, G. Blanke, C. Kellner, A. Hoffmann, S. Herres-Pawlis,
U. Schatzschneider, TUCAN: a molecular identifier and descriptor applicable to
the whole periodic table from hydrogen to oganesson, J. Chemin.-. 14 (1) (2022)
66, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-022-00640-5.
[25] K.V. Chuang, L.M. Gunsalus, M.J. Keiser, Learning molecular representations for
medicinal chemistry, J. Med. Chem. 63 (16) (2020) 8705–8722, https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00385.
[26] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, P. Vincent, Representation learning: a review and new
perspectives, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 35 (8) (2013) 1798–1828,
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50.
[27] D. Weininger, SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1.
Introduction to methodology and encoding rules, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 28
(1) (1988) 31–36, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005.
(28]RDKit. RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. 〈https://www.rdkit.org〉. https://
www.rdkit.org.
[29] S.R. Heller, A. McNaught, I. Pletnev, S. Stein, D. Tchekhovskoi, InChI, the IUPAC
International Chemical Identifier, J. Chemin.-. 7 (1) (2015) 23, https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13321-015-0068-4.
[30] W.A. Warr, Many InChIs and quite some feat, J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 29 (8)
(2015) 681–694, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10822-015-9854-3.
[31] Daylight Chemical Information Systems, Inc. SMARTS - A Language for
Describing Molecular Patterns. 〈https://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/t
heory/theory.smarts.html〉.
[32] J. Yang, Y. Cai, K. Zhao, H. Xie, X. Chen, Concepts and applications of chemical
fingerprint for hit and lead screening, Drug Discov. Today 27 (11) (2022) 103356,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2022.103356.
[33] A. Golbraikh, A. Tropsha, QSAR modeling using chirality descriptors derived
from molecular topology, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 43 (1) (2003) 144–154,
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci025516b.
[34] K.C. Chu, R.J. Feldmann, M.B. Shapiro, G.F. Hazard, R.I. Geran, Pattern
recognition and structure-activity relation studies. Computer-assisted prediction
of antitumor activity in structurally diverse drugs in an experimental mouse brain
tumor system, J. Med Chem. 18 (6) (1975) 539–545, https://doi.org/10.1021/
jm00240a001.
[35] P. Baldi, R.W. Benz, D.S. Hirschberg, S.J. Swamidass, Lossless compression of
chemical fingerprints using integer entropy codes improves storage and retrieval,
J. Chem. Inf. Model 47 (6) (2007) 2098–2109, https://doi.org/10.1021/
ci700200n.
[36] Y. Wang, S.H. Bryant, T. Cheng, J. Wang, A. Gindulyte, B.A. Shoemaker, P.
A. Thiessen, S. He, J. Zhang, PubChem BioAssay: 2017 update, Nucleic Acids Res
45 (D1) (2017) D955–D963, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1118.
[37] J.L. Durant, B.A. Leland, D.R. Henry, J.G. Nourse, Reoptimization of MDL keys for
use in drug discovery, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 42 (6) (2002) 1273–1280,
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci010132r.
[38] L. Xue, F.L. Stahura, J.W. Godden, J. Bajorath, Mini-fingerprints detect similar
activity of receptor ligands previously recognized only by three-dimensional
pharmacophore-based methods, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 41 (2) (2001)
394–401, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci000305x.
[39] G.M. Downs, J.M. Barnard, Techniques for generating descriptive fingerprints in
combinatorial libraries, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 37 (1) (1997) 59–61, https://
doi.org/10.1021/ci960091c.
[40] J. Schwartz, M. Awale, J.-L. Reymond, SMIfp (SMILES Fingerprint) chemical
space for virtual screening and visualization of large databases of organic
molecules, J. Chem. Inf. Model 53 (8) (2013) 1979–1989, https://doi.org/
10.1021/ci400206h.
[41] R.C. Glem, A. Bender, C.H. Arnby, L. Carlsson, S. Boyer, J. Smith, Circular
fingerprints: flexible molecular descriptors with applications from physical
chemistry to ADME, IDrugs 9 (3) (2006) 199–204.
[42] D. Rogers, M. Hahn, Extended-connectivity fingerprints, J. Chem. Inf. Model 50
(5) (2010) 742–754, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci100050t.

[43] S.T. Hutchinson, R. Kobayashi, Solvent-specific featurization for predicting free
energies of solvation through machine learning, J. Chem. Inf. Model 59 (4)
(2019) 1338–1346, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00901.
[44] A. Bender, H.Y. Mussa, R.C. Glen, S. Reiling, Similarity searching of chemical
databases using atom environment descriptors (MOLPRINT 2D): evaluation of
performance, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 44 (5) (2004) 1708–1718, https://doi.
org/10.1021/ci0498719.
[45] A. Bender, H.Y. Mussa, G.S. Gill, R.C. Glen, Molecular surface point environments
for virtual screening and the elucidation of binding patterns (MOLPRINT 3D),
J. Med Chem. 47 (26) (2004) 6569–6583, https://doi.org/10.1021/jm049611i.
[46] E. Estrada, E. Uriarte, Recent advances on the role of topological indices in drug
discovery research, Curr. Med Chem. 8 (13) (2001) 1573–1588, https://doi.org/
10.2174/0929867013371923.
[47] M. Awale, J.-L. Reymond, Atom pair 2D-fingerprints perceive 3D-molecular shape
and pharmacophores for very fast virtual screening of ZINC and GDB-17, J. Chem.
Inf. Model 54 (7) (2014) 1892–1907, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci500232g.
[48] R. Nilakantan, N. Bauman, J.S. Dixon, R. Venkataraghavan, Topological torsion: a
new molecular descriptor for SAR applications. comparison with other
descriptors, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 27 (2) (1987) 82–85, https://doi.org/
10.1021/ci00054a008.
[49] Daylight Chemical Information Systems. Fingerprints - Screening and Similarity. 〈htt
ps://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.finger.html〉.
[50] O. Méndez-Lucio, A.J. Kooistra, C. de Graaf, A. Bender, J.L. Medina-Franco,
Analyzing multitarget activity landscapes using protein-ligand interaction
fingerprints: interaction cliffs, J. Chem. Inf. Model 55 (2) (2015) 251–262,
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci500721x.
[51] Z. Deng, C. Chuaqui, J. Singh, Structural Interaction Fingerprint (SIFt): a novel
method for analyzing three-dimensional protein− ligand binding interactions,
J. Med. Chem. 47 (2) (2004) 337–344, https://doi.org/10.1021/jm030331x.
[52] M. Wójcikowski, M. Kukiełka, M.M. Stepniewska-Dziubinska, P. Siedlecki,
Development of a Protein-Ligand Extended Connectivity (PLEC) fingerprint and
its application for binding affinity predictions, Bioinformatics 35 (8) (2019)
1334–1341, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty757.
[53] M.J. Vainio, J.S. Puranen, M.S. Johnson, ShaEP: molecular overlay based on
shape and electrostatic potential, J. Chem. Inf. Model 49 (2) (2009) 492–502,
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci800315d.
[54] R. Todeschini, V. Consonni, Molecular Descriptors for Chemoinformatics, Wiley,
2009, https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527628766.
[55] Grisoni, F.; Consonni, V.; Todeschini, R. Impact of Molecular Descriptors on
Computational Models; 2018; pp 171-209. 〈https://doi.org/10.1007/978
-1-4939-8639-2_5〉.
[56] Grisoni, F.; Ballabio, D.; Todeschini, R.; Consonni, V. Molecular Descriptors for
Structure-Activity Applications: A Hands-On Approach; 2018; pp 3-53. 〈https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7899-1_1〉.
[57] C.A. Lipinski, F. Lombardo, B.W. Dominy, P.J. Feeney, Experimental and
computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in drug
discovery and development settings, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 23 (1-3) (1997) 3–25,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-409X(96)00423-1.
[58] D.F. Veber, S.R. Johnson, H.-Y. Cheng, B.R. Smith, K.W. Ward, K.D. Kopple,
Molecular properties that influence the oral bioavailability of drug candidates,
J. Med Chem. 45 (12) (2002) 2615–2623, https://doi.org/10.1021/jm020017n.
[59] CAS. CAS Reactions. 〈https://www.cas.org/cas-data/cas-reactions〉.
[60] W.A. Warr, A short review of chemical reaction database systems, computeraided synthesis design, reaction prediction and synthetic feasibility, Mol. Inf. 33
(6-7) (2014) 469–476, https://doi.org/10.1002/minf.201400052.
[61] F.I. Saldívar-González, G. Navarrete-Vázquez, J.L. Medina-Franco, Design of a
multi-target focused library for antidiabetic targets using a comprehensive set of
chemical transformation rules, Front Pharm. 14 (2023), https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphar.2023.1276444.
[62] Daylight Summer School. Reaction SMILES and SMIRKS.
[63] Daylight Chemical Information Systems, Inc. SMIRKS - A Reaction Transform
Language. 〈https://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smirks.ht
ml〉.
[64] G. Grethe, J.M. Goodman, C.H. Allen, International chemical identifier for
reactions (RInChI), J. Chemin.-. 5 (1) (2013) 45, https://doi.org/10.1186/17582946-5-45.
[65] A. de Luca, D. Horvath, G. Marcou, V. Solov’ev, A. Varnek, Mining chemical
reactions using neighborhood behavior and condensed graphs of reactions
approaches, J. Chem. Inf. Model 52 (9) (2012) 2325–2338, https://doi.org/
10.1021/ci300149n.
[66] Dugundji, J.; Ugi, I. An Algebraic Model of Constitutional Chemistry as a Basis for
Chemical Computer Programs. In Computers in Chemistry; Springer-Verlag: Berlin/
Heidelberg; pp 19-64. 〈https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0051317〉.
[67] S. Maiti, S. Ram, S. Pal, Extension of Ugi’s scheme for model-driven classification
of chemical reactions, Int. J. Chemoinformatics Chem. Eng. 4 (1) (2015) 26–51,
https://doi.org/10.4018/IJCCE.2015010103.
[68] M.A. Siani, D. Weininger, J.M. Blaney, CHUCKLES: a method for representing and
searching peptide and peptoid sequences on both monomer and atomic levels,
J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 34 (3) (1994) 588–593, https://doi.org/10.1021/
ci00019a017.
[69] M.A. Siani, D. Weininger, C.A. James, J.M. Blaney, CHORTLES: a method for
representing oligomeric and template-based mixtures, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci.
35 (6) (1995) 1026–1033, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00028a012.
[70] W.L. Chen, B.A. Leland, J.L. Durant, D.L. Grier, B.D. Christie, J.G. Nourse, K.
T. Taylor, Self-contained sequence representation: bridging the gap between

19

K. López-Pérez et al.

Arti cial Intelligence Chemistry 2 (2024) 100077

bioinformatics and cheminformatics, J. Chem. Inf. Model 51 (9) (2011)
2186–2208, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci2001988.
[71] T. Zhang, H. Li, H. Xi, R.V. Stanton, S.H. Rotstein, HELM: a hierarchical notation
language for complex biomolecule structure representation, J. Chem. Inf. Model
52 (10) (2012) 2796–2806, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci3001925.
[72] K. Tanaka, K.F. Aoki-Kinoshita, M. Kotera, H. Sawaki, S. Tsuchiya, N. Fujita,
T. Shikanai, M. Kato, S. Kawano, I. Yamada, H. Narimatsu, WURCS: the Web3
unique representation of carbohydrate structures, J. Chem. Inf. Model 54 (6)
(2014) 1558–1566, https://doi.org/10.1021/ci400571e.
[73] M. Matsubara, K.F. Aoki-Kinoshita, N.P. Aoki, I. Yamada, H. Narimatsu, WURCS
2.0 update to encapsulate ambiguous carbohydrate structures, J. Chem. Inf.
Model 57 (4) (2017) 632–637, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00650.
[74] D. Bajusz, A. Rácz, K. Héberger, Chemical data formats, fingerprints, and other
molecular descriptions for database analysis and searching, Compr. Med. Chem.
III 3-8 (2017) 329–378, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409547-2.12345-5.
[75] J. Lu, H.A. Carlson, ChemTreeMap: an interactive map of biochemical similarity
in molecular datasets, Bioinformatics 32 (23) (2016) 3584–3592, https://doi.org/
10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTW523.
[76] E.M. Garcia-Romero, E. López-López, C. Soriano-Correa, J.L. Medina-Franco,
C. Barrientos-Salcedo, Polypharmacological drug design opportunities against
Parkinson’s disease, 2022 11:1176, F1000Research 11 (2022) 1176, https://doi.
org/10.12688/f1000research.124160.1.
[77] S.B. Munch, T.L. Rogers, G. Sugihara, Recent developments in empirical dynamic
modelling, Methods Ecol. Evol. 14 (3) (2023) 732–745, https://doi.org/10.1111/
2041-210X.13983.
[78] R. Zwick, E. Carlstein, D.V. Budescu, Measures of Similarity among fuzzy
concepts: a comparative analysis, Int. J. Approx. Reason. 1 (2) (1987) 221–242,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0888-613X(87)90015-6.
[79] A. Ciaramella, D. Nardone, A. Staiano, Data integration by fuzzy similarity-based
hierarchical clustering, BMC Bioinforma. 21 (10) (2020) 1–15, https://doi.org/
10.1186/S12859-020-03567-6/FIGURES/9.
[80] C.R. García-Jacas, Y. Marrero-Ponce, C.A. Brizuela, J. Suárez-Lezcano,
F. Martinez-Rios, Smoothed spherical truncation based on fuzzy membership
functions: application to the molecular encoding, J. Comput. Chem. 41 (3) (2020)
203–217, https://doi.org/10.1002/JCC.26089.
[81] M.M. Edim, O.C. Enudi, B.B. Asuquo, H. Louis, E.A. Bisong, J.A. Agwupuye, A.
G. Chioma, J.O. Odey, I. Joseph, F.I. Bassey, Aromaticity Indices, electronic
structural properties, and fuzzy atomic space investigations of naphthalene and
its aza-derivatives, Heliyon 7 (2) (2021) e06138, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
HELIYON.2021.E06138.
[82] U. Norinder, J.J. Naveja, E. López-López, D. Mucs, J.L. Medina-Franco, Conformal
prediction of HDAC inhibitors, SAR QSAR Environ. Res 30 (4) (2019) 265–277,
https://doi.org/10.1080/1062936X.2019.1591503.
[83] D. Leng, L. Zheng, Y. Wen, Y. Zhang, L. Wu, J. Wang, M. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. He,
X. Bo, A benchmark study of deep learning-based multi-omics data fusion
methods for cancer, Genome Biol. 23 (1) (2022) 1–32, https://doi.org/10.1186/
S13059-022-02739-2/FIGURES/9.
[84] H. Chen, L. Carlsson, M. Eriksson, P. Varkonyi, U. Norinder, I. Nilsson, Beyond the
scope of Free-Wilson analysis: building interpretable QSAR models with machine
learning algorithms, J. Chem. Inf. Model 53 (6) (2013) 1324–1336, https://doi.
org/10.1021/CI4001376/SUPPL_FILE/CI4001376_SI_002.XLSX.
[85] X. Chen, R. Miao, L. Zhang, Z. Yuan, H. Li, S. Li, Computational methods for
scaffold hopping, Privil. Scaffolds Drug Discov. (2023) 931–948, https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-443-18611-0.00008-5.
[86] K.D. Freeman-Cook, P. Amor, S. Bader, L.M. Buzon, S.B. Coffey, J.W. Corbett, K.
J. Dirico, S.D. Doran, R.L. Elliott, W. Esler, A. Guzman-Perez, K.E. Henegar, J.
A. Houser, C.S. Jones, C. Limberakis, K. Loomis, K. McPherson, S. Murdande, K.
L. Nelson, D. Phillion, B.S. Pierce, W. Song, E. Sugarman, S. Tapley, M. Tu,
Z. Zhao, Maximizing lipophilic efficiency: the use of free-wilson analysis in the
design of inhibitors of acetyl-CoA carboxylase, J. Med Chem. 55 (2) (2012)
935–942, https://doi.org/10.1021/JM201503U/SUPPL_FILE/JM201503U_SI_
001.PDF.
[87] S. Sciabola, R.V. Stanton, S. Wittkopp, S. Wildman, D. Moshinsky, S. Potluri,
H. Xi, Predicting kinase selectivity profiles using free-Wilson QSAR analysis,
J. Chem. Inf. Model 48 (9) (2008) 1851–1867, https://doi.org/10.1021/
CI800138N/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/CI-2008-00138N_0012.JPEG.
[88] M. Zloh, E.G. Samaras, J. Calvo-Castro, A. Guirguis, J.L. Stair, S.B. Kirton,
Drowning in diversity? A systematic way of clustering and selecting a
representative set of new psychoactive substances, RSC Adv. 7 (84) (2017)
53181–53191, https://doi.org/10.1039/C7RA09066H.
[89] S.A. Hudson, S. Surade, A.G. Coyne, K.J. McLean, D. Leys, A.W. Munro, C. Abell,
S.A. Hudson, A.G. Coyne, C. Abell, S. Surade, K.J. McLean, D. Leys, A.W. Munro,
Overcoming the limitations of fragment merging: rescuing a strained merged
fragment series targeting mycobacterium tuberculosis CYP121, ChemMedChem 8
(9) (2013) 1451–1456, https://doi.org/10.1002/CMDC.201300219.
[90] Z. Wu, J. Wang, H. Du, D. Jiang, Y. Kang, D. Li, P. Pan, Y. Deng, D. Cao, C.
Y. Hsieh, T. Hou, Chemistry-intuitive explanation of graph neural networks for
molecular property prediction with substructure masking, 2023 14:1, Nat.
Commun. 14 (1) (2023) 1–15, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-38192-3.
[91] M. Prakash, Y. Itoh, Y. Fujiwara, Y. Takahashi, Y. Takada, P. Mellini, E.E. Elboray,
M. Terao, Y. Yamashita, C. Yamamoto, T. Yamaguchi, M. Kotoku, Y. Kitao,
R. Singh, R. Roy, S. Obika, M. Oba, D.O. Wang, T. Suzuki, Identification of potent
and selective inhibitors of fat mass obesity-associated protein using a fragmentmerging approach, J. Med. Chem. 64 (21) (2021) 15810–15824, https://doi.org/
10.1021/ACS.JMEDCHEM.1C01107/SUPPL_FILE/JM1C01107_SI_003.CSV.

[92] S. Wills, R. Sanchez-Garcia, T. Dudgeon, S.D. Roughley, A. Merritt, R.E. Hubbard,
J. Davidson, F. Von Delft, C.M. Deane, Fragment merging using a graph database
samples different catalogue space than similarity search, J. Chem. Inf. Model 63
(11) (2023) 3423–3437, https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.JCIM.3C00276/ASSET/
IMAGES/LARGE/CI3C00276_0006.JPEG.
[93] A.L. Chávez-Hernández, J.L. Medina-Franco, Natural products subsets: generation
and characterization, Artif. Intell. Life Sci. 3 (2023) 100066, https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.AILSCI.2023.100066.
[94] N.P. Dong, Y.Z. Liang, Q.S. Xu, D.K.W. Mok, L.Z. Yi, H.M. Lu, M. He, W. Fan,
Prediction of peptide fragment ion mass spectra by data mining techniques, Anal.
Chem. 86 (15) (2014) 7446–7454, https://doi.org/10.1021/AC501094M/SUPPL_
FILE/AC501094M_SI_001.PDF.
[95] A. Musnier, T. Bourquard, A. Vallet, L. Mathias, G. Bruneau, M.A. Ayoub,
O. Travert, Y. Corde, N. Gallay, T. Boulo, S. Cortes, H. Watier, P. Crépieux,
E. Reiter, A. Poupon, A new in silico antibody similarity measure both identifies
large sets of epitope binders with distinct CDRs and accurately predicts off-target
reactivity, 2022, Vol. 23, Page 9765, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (17) (2022) 9765, https://
doi.org/10.3390/IJMS23179765.
[96] D.J. Rogers, T.T. Tanimoto, A computer program for classifying plants, Science
(1979) 132 (3434) (1960) 1115–1118, https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.132.3434.1115.
[97] P.F. Russell, T.R. Rao, others, On habitat and association of species of anopheline
larvae in South-Eastern Madras, J. Malar. Inst. India 3 (1) (1940).
[98] R.R. Sokal, C.D. Michener, A Statistical Method for Evaluating Systematic
Relationships, University of Kansas science bulletin. University of Kansas, 1958.
[99] A. Tversky, Features of similarity, Psychol. Rev. 84 (4) (1977) 327–352, https://
doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.4.327.
[100] J. Rahnama, E. Hüllermeier, Learning tversky similarity, Inf. Process. Manag.
Uncertain. Knowl. -Based Syst. 1238 (2020) 269, https://doi.org/10.1007/9783-030-50143-3_21.
[101] R. Carbó, L. Leyda, M. Arnau, How similar is a molecule to another? An electron
density measure of similarity between two molecular structures, Int J. Quantum
Chem. 17 (6) (1980) 1185–1189, https://doi.org/10.1002/QUA.560170612.
[102] W. Kohn, L.J. Sham, Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation
effects, Phys. Rev. 140 (4A) (1965) A1133, https://doi.org/10.1103/
PHYSREV.140.A1133/FIGURE/1/THUMB.
[103] P. Hohenberg, W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Phys. Rev. 136 (3B) (1964)
B864, https://doi.org/10.1103/PHYSREV.136.B864/FIGURE/1/THUMB.
[104] L. Amat, R. Carbo-Dorca, Quantum similarity measures under atomic shell
approximation: first order density fitting using elementary jacobi rotations´
Rotations´Rotations´ and Carbo-Dorca, J. Comput. Chem. 18 (16) (1997), https://
doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(199712)18:16.
[105] E.E. Hodgkin, W.G. Richards, Molecular similarity based on electrostatic potential
and electric field, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 32 (S14) (1987) 105–110, https://doi.
org/10.1002/QUA.560320814.
[106] J.D. Petke, Cumulative and discrete similarity analysis of electrostatic potentials
and fields, J. Comput. Chem. 14 (8) (1993) 928–933, https://doi.org/10.1002/
JCC.540140808.
[107] R. Carb, E. Besalfi, X. Fradera, On quantum molecular similarity measures
(QMSM) and indices (QMSI), J. Math. Chem. 19 (1996) 47–56.
[108] R. Ponec, L. Amat, R. Carbó-Dorca, Molecular basis of quantitative structureproperties relationships (QSPR): a quantum similarity approach, J. Comput.
Aided Mol. Des. 13 (3) (1999) 259–270, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1008059505361/METRICS.
[109] R. Carbó, E. Besalú, L. Amat, X. Fradera, QuantuM Molecular Similarity Measures
(QMSM) as a Natural Way Leading Towards A Theoretical Foundation Of
Quantitative Structure-properties Relationships (QSPR), J. Math. Chem. 18 (2)
(1995) 237–246, https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01164661/METRICS.
[110] D.M. Anstine, O. Isayev, GeneratiVe Models As An Emerging Paradigm In The
Chemical Sciences, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 145 (16) (2023) 8736–8750, https://doi.
org/10.1021/JACS.2C13467/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/JA2C13467_0005.JPEG.
[111] C. Bilodeau, W. Jin, T. Jaakkola, R. Barzilay, K.F. Jensen, Generative models for
molecular discovery: recent advances and challenges, Wiley Inter. Rev. Comput.
Mol. Sci. 12 (5) (2022) e1608, https://doi.org/10.1002/WCMS.1608.
[112] Tibo, A.; He, J.; Janet, J.P.; Nittinger, E.; Engkvist, O. Exhaustive Local Chemical
Space Exploration using a Transformer Model. 2023. 〈https://doi.org/10.26434/
CHEMRXIV-2023-V25XB〉.
[113] L. Yang, G. Yang, Z. Bing, Y. Tian, Y. Niu, L. Huang, L. Yang, Transformer-based
generative model accelerating the development of Novel BRAF inhibitors, ACS
Omega 6 (49) (2021) 33864–33873, https://doi.org/10.1021/
ACSOMEGA.1C05145/ASSET/IMAGES/MEDIUM/AO1C05145_M004.GIF.
[114] O. Dollar, N. Joshi, D.A.C. Beck, J. Pfaendtner, Attention-based generative models
for de novo molecular design, Chem. Sci. 12 (24) (2021) 8362–8372, https://doi.
org/10.1039/D1SC01050F.
[115] Yoshikai, Y.; Mizuno, T.; Nemoto, S.; Kusuhara, H. A Novel Molecule Generative
Model of VAE Combined with Transformer.
[116] Yue, T.; Tao, L.; Varshney, V.; Li, Y. Benchmarking Study of Deep Generative
Models for Inverse Polymer Design. 2024. 〈https://doi.org/10.26434/CH
EMRXIV-2024-GZQ4R〉.
[117] T. Song, Y. Ren, S. Wang, P. Han, L. Wang, X. Li, A. Rodriguez-Patón, DNMG:
Deep molecular generative model by fusion of 3D information for de novo drug
design, Methods 211 (2023) 10–22, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
YMETH.2023.02.001.
[118] G. Weng, H. Zhao, D. Nie, H. Zhang, L. Liu, T. Hou, Y. Kang, RediscMol:
benchmarking molecular generation models in biological properties, J. Med

20

